                                              SIGA: Self-Evolving Coding-Agent Adapters for
                                                           Scientific Simulation


                                                     Matthew Ho        Brian Liu Jixuan Chen Audrey Wang                 Lianhui Qin
                                                                           University of California, San Diego




arXiv:2606.09774v1 [cs.AI] 8 Jun 2026
                                                                                        Abstract
                                                    Advanced scientific simulators expose specialized input languages that turn simula-
                                                    tion goals into executable configurations, but learning and using these interfaces
                                                    can cost domain scientists hours to days. We study simulator setup as a problem of
                                                    agent-tool interface grounding: what minimal simulator-specific adaptations are
                                                    needed for an off-the-shelf coding agent to operate real scientific software? Our
                                                    intuition is that coding agents already know how to navigate files, edit code, run
                                                    commands, and repair outputs, but they lack the simulator’s executable contract: its
                                                    vocabulary, structural constraints, validation rules, and termination conditions. We
                                                    introduce SIGA, a Simulator-Interface Grounding Adapter that supplies this con-
                                                    tract through retrieval, procedural memory, in-trajectory validation, and validation-
                                                    enforced termination. We primarily evaluate SIGA on GEOS, an open-source
                                                    multiphysics simulator used in subsurface science. SIGA produces a complete
                                                    GEOS deck in about five minutes with TreeSim above 0.90, matching the quality
                                                    of an extended-budget human expert who required about three hours, a roughly
                                                    36× wall-clock speedup. On a harder held-out set, grounding raises TreeSim from
                                                    0.720 to 0.789, a roughly 10% relative gain over the bare agent, and can reduce
                                                    the across-seed standard deviation by 16×. Self-evolution further improves SIGA
                                                    by rewriting adapter contents from prior trajectories, yielding the highest held-out
                                                    GEOS mean and matching or outperforming the strongest hand-designed configura-
                                                    tion. Transfers to OpenFOAM and LAMMPS show that the dominant mechanism
                                                    shifts by interface: validation matters most when structural completeness is the
                                                    bottleneck, while memory and retrieval matter most when domain correctness is
                                                    the bottleneck. Together, these results suggest that lightweight, self-improvable
                                                    grounding layers can turn general coding agents into practical operators of scientific
                                                    software.


                                        1    Introduction
                                        Scientific simulation is one of the central computational workflows in modern science. Researchers
                                        use simulators to study physical, chemical, biological, and engineering processes that would be
                                        expensive, slow, dangerous, or impossible to observe directly in the laboratory. In geophysics,
                                        simulators such as the GEOS 1 [GEOS Development Team, 2024] model CO2 sequestration, reservoir
                                        flow, hydraulic fracture, wellbore behavior, and induced seismicity; in molecular science, molecular-
                                        dynamics engines such as LAMMPS [Holbrook et al., 2026] encode atomistic systems, force fields,
                                        and time-integration protocols. Across these domains, the scientific goal may be expressed in natural
                                        language, but the executable simulation must be written in a simulator-specific input language.
                                        This translation from scientific intent to runnable simulator configuration is a persistent bottleneck in
                                        simulation-driven research. Advanced simulators are not simple tools with a few stable arguments.
                                        They expose large domain-specific language (DSL) whose tokens name solver classes, material
                                            1 https://github.com/GEOS-DEV/GEOS




                                        Preprint.
Figure 1: Illustrative example of advanced tooling usage bottleneck for the geophysics domain.
Here, the GEOS simulator’s extensive documentation helps as a translation guide for its elaborate
configuration that is a custom XML (domain specific language/DSL) to produce results such as simu-
lating carbon sequestration in deep saline formations (top right) or reservoir flow in heterogeneous
hydrocarbon (bottom right).



models, mesh regions, boundary conditions, event schedules, numerical schemes, and output requests.
A valid input deck must satisfy syntax constraints, schema constraints, and physical or domain-
conventional constraints, while maintaining consistent names and references across sections and often
across files. Scientists new to a simulator can therefore spend hours or days reading documentation,
searching examples, testing numerical settings, and debugging invalid configurations before obtaining
a runnable deck (Fig. 1).
This setup stage is a natural target for agentic AI because it is both valuable and constrained. It is
valuable because reducing setup time directly accelerates scientific iteration. It is constrained because
the agent is not being asked to invent a new hypothesis or interpret final physical results; it is being
asked to operate an existing scientific tool according to a given specification. This makes simulator
setup a useful near-term testbed for scientific agents. If current agents cannot reliably translate a
specification into a simulator DSL, they are unlikely to be dependable in broader workflows that
require experimental design, hypothesis revision, and domain reasoning.
Recent scientific-agent systems have explored chemistry [Bran et al., 2023, Boiko et al., 2023],
molecular dynamics [Shi et al., 2026, Zhao et al., 2026, Guilbert et al., 2025], computational fluid
dynamics [Chen et al., 2024a, Yue et al., 2025a, Pandey et al., 2025], finite-element and multiphysics
modeling [Zhang et al., 2025, Park et al., 2026, Ni and Buehler, 2023], reservoir simulation [Lie
et al., 2026], and other simulator-centered workflows. Two complementary gaps motivate our
study. Application-wise, to the best of our knowledge no agent has been designed for GEOS in
particular, despite its central role in subsurface science: existing geoscience language models focus
on knowledge access and question answering [Deng et al., 2023, Lin et al., 2024], and the closest
geoscience-agent systems target narrower simulator families [Bekele, 2025, Ren et al., 2025, Lie
et al., 2026]. Method-wise, many of these systems build simulator-specific agent loops from scratch,
including custom planning, tool calling, retry logic, and termination handling, rather than building on
the substantial engineering already invested in frontier coding agents such as Claude Code or open-
source efforts such as OpenHands [Wang et al., 2025]. We study a different design point: adapting
an off-the-shelf coding agent. Modern coding agents already provide useful infrastructure for file
navigation, iterative editing, shell use, and code repair. There is a further, less obvious reason to build
on the harness rather than around it: frontier models are increasingly post-trained inside specific
agent harnesses (e.g., Cursor Research et al., 2026), so their planning, tool-use, and self-correction


                                                    2
behaviors are calibrated to that scaffolding. Re-implementing the orchestration layer from scratch
discards this alignment, whereas adapting the native harness preserves it and concentrates engineering
on the simulator-specific gap. The remaining question is what simulator-specific grounding layer is
needed to make such agents reliable simulator setup assistants.
We answer this question with the Simulator-Interface Grounding Adapter (SIGA), a thin wrapper
around an off-the-shelf coding agent. The design is based on a simple intuition: modern coding agents
already provide useful general machinery for navigating files, editing code, running commands, and
repairing outputs, but they do not know the exact contract imposed by a scientific simulator. In
simulator setup, failures therefore arise less from the lack of a generic agent loop than from missing
interface grounding: the agent may not know the simulator’s vocabulary, may drift away from schema
or structural constraints while editing, or may stop after producing a plausible-looking but incomplete
deck. SIGA addresses this by grounding the agent at the points where these failures occur: before
generation, during self-correction, and at termination.
Concretely, SIGA factorizes this grounding into four reusable components. Retrieval gives semantic
access to simulator documentation, schemas, examples, and technical snippets; procedural memory
keeps high-frequency simulator vocabulary and configuration patterns always visible; an agent-
callable validator lets the agent check and repair outputs mid-trajectory; and a stop-hook makes
validation a mandatory termination condition, preventing the agent from finishing with incomplete or
structurally invalid deliverables. This decomposition is simulator-agnostic: the same slots instantiate
as XML schema checks for GEOS, required-file and dictionary checks for OpenFOAM, and checks
over commands, references, force-field declarations, and run-control blocks for LAMMPS. Because
SIGA is a small adapter rather than a full agent loop, it also creates a compact optimization surface:
we can ask whether prior trajectories can automatically improve the adapter’s primer, memory, and
auxiliary skills.
Our study yields four findings. (1) Grounding turns hours of expert setup into minutes at
expert-level quality. On a representative GEOS task, a geoscience expert new to GEOS reached
a complete, high-quality deck only after roughly three hours, whereas the SIGA-equipped agent
matched that quality in about five minutes, a ∼36× gain in setup efficiency at parity with extended-
budget expert quality. (2) Grounding raises reliability, not just speed. On a harder held-out task set,
grounding improves mean deck quality by roughly 10% relative to the bare agent and cuts across-run
standard deviation by about 16×, with no loss in efficiency. (3) Further improvements can be
discovered automatically. A self-evolved variant that rewrites its own grounding components from
prior trajectories matches or outperforms the best hand-designed configuration on the held-out set
without hand-tuning. (4) The useful mechanism shifts with the simulator interface. Validation
enforces structural completeness in GEOS and OpenFOAM, while memory and retrieval supply
domain knowledge in LAMMPS, so adapting to a new simulator is less a matter of redesigning the
agent than of selecting which grounding slots to emphasize.
Taken together, these results suggest a pragmatic near-term target for AI-for-science: making agents
reliable at operating the complex software scientific work already depends on. This is a bounded
and immediately valuable goal, distinct from and a sensible precursor to the longer-term aim of
autonomous scientific discovery. A lightweight, self-improvable grounding layer around a general
coding agent can cut simulator setup from hours to minutes, while adapting to each simulator’s
dominant bottleneck (validation for incomplete outputs; memory and retrieval for incorrect domain
values). The minimal grounding design and the self-evolution mechanism together give a concrete
recipe for adapting a general coding agent to a new simulator interface with modest effort.


2   Related work

LLM agents for scientific code and simulators. Scientific-coding agents are studied on curated
benchmarks (ScienceAgentBench, DA-Code Chen et al. [2024b], Huang et al. [2024]) and built
as general-purpose harnesses (OpenHands, SWE-agent Wang et al. [2025], Yang et al. [2024a]),
self-debugging loops Chen et al. [2023], or specialised search frameworks (SciNav Zhang and Sun
[2026]). Domain-application systems include ChemCrow Bran et al. [2023] and Coscientist Boiko
et al. [2023] for chemistry, CellVoyager Alber et al. [2026] for single-cell analysis, and The AI
Scientist Lu et al. [2024], Yamada et al. [2025] for end-to-end ML research. Closer to our setting are
agents for scientific simulators: OpenFOAM-oriented computational fluid dynamics agents Chen


                                                  3
et al. [2024a], Pandey et al. [2025], Yue et al. [2025b], molecular-dynamics agents Shi et al. [2026],
Guilbert et al. [2025], Zhao et al. [2026], finite-element/mechanics agents Zhang et al. [2025], Ni and
Buehler [2023], and reservoir-simulation agents Lie et al. [2026]. The shared design lesson is that
general-purpose LLMs are insufficient for high-fidelity simulator use unless wrapped with domain
grounding, structured interfaces, execution feedback, and iterative correction. Unlike most of these
we build on top of an existing engineered coding harness (Claude Code) rather than writing an agent
loop from scratch. Foam-Agent 2.0 Yue et al. [2025b] and MetaOpenFOAM Chen et al. [2024a]
are the most direct comparators for our OpenFOAM transfer study (§6.5); we compare against their
lint-only execution mode and treat those as baselines.

Self-evolving agents, memory, and procedural guidance. Recent agent work treats capability
as an iterative loop of planning, execution, feedback, and refinement that externalises experience
into memory, search states, or revised plans [Bran et al., 2023, Boiko et al., 2023, Alber et al., 2026,
Lu et al., 2024, Zhang and Sun, 2026, Li et al., 2026, Tang et al., 2025, Narayanan et al., 2024]. A
particularly active subfield, which treats the agent’s own scaffolding as a learnable object (variously
studied under the headings of meta-harness design Lee et al. [2026], harness-as-code Ning et al.
[2026], agentic harness engineering Lin et al. [2026], and skill optimization Yang et al. [2026]),
has shown promising results on core AI benchmarks (coding, terminal navigation, math). Our
self-evolved variant (§4.3) adopts this reflect-and-rewrite paradigm: the agent revises its own plugin,
the adapter, based on prior trajectories. Our focus is different: we study whether such self-revision
helps on a task whose bottleneck is domain knowledge and procedural guidance rather than general
programming competence. This connects to work on procedural memory and cheatsheets for LLMs,
such as Buffer of Thoughts [Yang et al., 2024b]; we return to this interface in §7.


3     Background: GEOS as a domain-specific simulator language

A GEOS [GEOS Development Team, 2024] deck is one or more XML files that specify a multi-
physics simulation across ten canonical sections, covering the mesh, geometry, execution schedule,
physics modules, material models, computational regions, numerical methods, field specifications,
functions, and outputs. Although GEOS reads plain XML, its elaborate tag vocabulary and vali-
dation schema make its configuration language closer to a small domain-specific language (DSL);
a deck is then a program in that language, whose tags name GEOS components and whose at-
tributes set their parameters. For example, a physics-module tag selects which governing equations
are advanced, a material-model tag defines the constitutive law, and region or output tags connect
those choices to parts of the mesh and requested results. Writing a deck is therefore a translation
from natural-language intent into a structured program over the simulator’s executable interface.
This is difficult for four reasons: (i) the vocabulary is large and contains near-duplicate compo-
nent names, such as DruckerPrager, ExtendedDruckerPrager, DruckerPragerHardening,
and ViscoDruckerPrager; (ii) documentation and examples may reflect older interface versions;
(iii) constraints span sections, so names introduced in one place must be reused consistently elsewhere;
and (iv) task briefs often under-specify choices that experts fill in with domain-conventional defaults.
The first difficulty is exact interface-token selection, while the others are program-level consistency
constraints. A concrete annotated deck is in App. K.


4     Method

4.1   Overview

We frame simulator setup as an interface-grounding problem for an off-the-shelf coding agent. A
modern coding agent already supplies the generic machinery this task needs: it inspects files, drafts
and edits candidate configurations, runs shell commands, reads back errors, and revises. What it
lacks is the target simulator’s executable contract: the simulator-specific vocabulary, the structural
and schema constraints a deck must satisfy, the means to check those constraints mid-edit, and the
condition under which a workspace is complete enough to return. Setup failures therefore stem less
from a missing agent loop than from missing interface grounding. SIGA supplies that grounding as a
thin adapter over a fixed coding harness, injected through the harness’s own extension mechanisms
rather than by rebuilding the loop (Fig. 2).


                                                   4
Figure 2: The SIGA method. A natural-language simulation brief feeds into the base coding agent
(a frozen harness H0 wrapping a frozen model π), which runs its generic context → act → observe
loop to author a configuration deck. The SIGA adapter grounds this loop at three interfaces, without
modifying the loop itself: always-on procedural memory (M) injected into the system context;
retrieval (R) and an XML validator (X) added as agent-callable tools; and a schema-validating
stop hook (S) that gates termination, returning structured repair feedback until the deck parses and
validates. The validated deck is emitted as output. The self-evolution loop (dashed) reflects offline on
logged trajectories to revise the adapter’s contents (primer, memory, auxiliary skills), updating the
adapter plugin package while the base harness H0 and model π stay fixed.


This adaptation-over-reconstruction stance is deliberate, for three reasons carried over from §1 and
§2. (i) Portability: porting to new scientific software requires rewriting only the simulator-facing
contract, not a bespoke agent codebase. (ii) Optimization surface: a small adapter is a tractable
object for self-evolution (§4.3), whereas a sprawling agent loop exposes many opportunities for
over-specification. (iii) Generality: by grounding only the simulator-specific contract and leaving
the generic loop untouched, the adapter does not overfit to the behavior of one model or one harness
version. The same grounding layer should carry over to updated or swapped models and harnesses
with little change, so that improvements in the underlying coding agent compound with the adapter
rather than invalidating it, and adapting to new model or harness behavior stays cheap.
The grounding layer is also deliberately minimal: rather than introduce new agent machinery, it
instantiates three well-established ideas from the agent literature, each addressing a distinct simulator-
setup failure. (1) Retrieval (R) adds an alternate interface to domain knowledge through semantic
query, for when the agent does not know the right simulator terms to search for. (2) Validator-driven
self-refinement supplies a correctness check that drives revision, in two complementary forms: agent-
managed mid-trajectory (X) and externally enforced at termination (S). (3) Procedural memory (M)
retains useful experience across sessions by writing it down and keeping it in view. These four
components plug into the harness at its context, tool, and termination interfaces, which we now
formalize.

4.2   The grounding adapter

Base harness and objective. Fix a frozen base model π wrapped by a frozen coding harness
H0 . Given a natural-language task x drawn from a task distribution X (a simulation brief), the
harness executes a rollout τ ∼ pπ (H0 , x): at each step it assembles a context from the system
prompt, interaction history, and tool outputs; the model emits an action at (a tool call or file edit);
the environment returns an observation; the loop repeats until a termination predicate fires, leaving
a workspace whose generated deck we denote ŷ(τ ). A reward r(τ, x) = Q ŷ(τ ), y ⋆ (x) ∈ [0, 1]
scores the generated configuration against a hand-validated ground truth y ⋆ (x) under the failures-as-
zero convention (§5), where Q is a task-appropriate quality metric: tree-edit similarity (TreeSim) for
GEOS, defined in §5, and the file-coverage and LLM-judge metrics of §6.5 and §6.6 for the transfer
studies. Following Lee et al. [2026], the goal of any harness-level adaptation isto maximize expected
                                                                       
reward over the harness rather than over model weights, max Ex∼X r(τ, x) with τ ∼ pπ (H0 , x).


                                                    5
Three grounding interfaces. Write the base harness as H0 = (c0 , T0 , stop0 ): an initial system
context c0 , a tool set T0 , and a default termination predicate stop0 . A SIGA adapter modifies exactly
these three interfaces, and nothing else in the loop:
                 c0 7→ c0 ⊕ m,         T0 7→ T0 ∪ TR ∪ TX ,         stop0 7→ stopS ,                 (1)
yielding an adapted harness HA and rollouts τ ∼ pπ (HA , x). Localizing all grounding to these three
well-defined points, context, tools, and termination, is what keeps the adapter thin and portable. The
four components instantiate the three ideas above at these slots; each is binary (present or absent),
and we describe them in turn, with implementation details in App. H.

R: retrieval (tool interface). The base agent may not reliably recover GEOS-specific tokens, such
as solver names, material models, schema attributes, and example-compatible block combinations.
The base coding agent can already retrieve over the simulator’s documentation and example tree
through its built-in find/grep tools, but this keyword search is brittle when the agent does not
already know the right simulator terms to search for. R therefore adds semantic search over the
same artifacts, the retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) approach that prior work has thoroughly
investigated [Lewis et al., 2021]: it extends the tool set with TR , semantic access through a Model
Context Protocol (MCP) server with three search tools: search_navigator over GEOS documen-
tation pages, search_schema over XSD schema entries, and search_technical over example
XML files and technical snippets. It targets unknown-vocabulary substitution.

S, X: validator-driven self-refinement (termination and tool interfaces). S and X expose the
same schema check, xmllint –schema against the canonical GEOS .xsd, but at different control
points. S acts at the termination interface, replacing stop0 with stopS : on every attempted termination
it scans /workspace/inputs/ for parseable XML, validates it, and either allows the agent to finish
or returns structured repair feedback, bounded by a per-task retry counter. S is mandatory whenever
enabled and targets silent incompleteness, where the agent stops with an empty, unparseable, or
schema-invalid deck. X acts at the tool interface, adding the same check to T0 as an optional MCP
tool, mcp__xmllint__validate_geos_xml, that the agent may call while drafting, inspecting an
intermediate file and revising before it finishes (about three calls per task on average when enabled);
X targets in-trajectory schema-violation drift. Together they are the two faces of validator-driven
self-refinement: externally enforced (S) and agent-managed (X).

M: procedural memory (context interface). Some simulator knowledge is repeatedly useful
across tasks and should not be rediscovered on every trajectory. M augments the always-on con-
text, c0 7→ c0 ⊕ m, where m is a compact 775-token cheatsheet appended to the system prompt
via –append-system-prompt, containing GEOS physics-module families, XML element names,
constitutive-model names, typical attributes, and short exemplars, distilled offline from 18 training
trajectories using a model different from the inference model. It is not an explicit policy but a
lightweight memory surface that keeps high-frequency simulator conventions in view, and targets
recurring-vocabulary lookup and repeated domain-interface mistakes.

The SIGA design space. A Simulator-Interface Grounding Adapter (SIGA) is a plugin built
on an existing coding agent from a small, fixed set of grounding ideas: cross-session procedural
memory (M), semantic retrieval over domain knowledge (R), and validator-driven self-refinement
applied mid-trajectory (X) and enforced at termination (S). Each idea plugs into the harness at one of
its context, tool, or termination interfaces. SIGA is therefore not a single fixed configuration but a
compact design space over these four ideas. A concrete adapter is a point b ∈ {0, 1}{R,S,X,M} in this
space, selecting which ideas are enabled, with b = 0 recovering the bare harness (Vanilla). Adapting
to a new simulator then means instantiating the relevant ideas against that simulator’s contract and
keeping those that help, since which idea is binding depends on the interface (§5); in this paper we
map the space by factorial ablation (§5.2). This small, bounded design space, rather than a bespoke
agent loop, is what makes the adapter cheap to port and tractable to self-evolve.

4.3   Self-evolving the adapter

The slots above fix where grounding enters; their textual contents are additional free parameters. Let
θ collect the adapter’s contents, the system primer, the memory cheatsheet m, and any agent-authored


                                                   6
auxiliary skills, giving a parameterized adapter Aθ . Hand-design fixes θ in advance; we instead test a
modest form of self-evolution that searches for it,
                       θ⋆ = arg max Ex∼Xsel r(τ, x) ,
                                                                              
                                                               τ ∼ pπ HAθ , x ,                     (2)
                                   θ

on a held-out validation-selection split Xsel . Mirroring the meta-harness outer loop [Lee et al., 2026],
the search is run offline by a coding-agent proposer that reads prior candidates’ contents, trajectories,
and rewards from a filesystem and proposes revised contents, retaining those that improve Xsel reward.
Crucially, this does not modify the underlying coding agent, introduce a new planning policy, or
search the full agent loop: the base harness H0 and model π stay frozen, and only the adapter contents
θ move, a far smaller search space than the entire harness program. This lets us ask whether the
adapter can improve from its own execution history on a domain-knowledge-heavy task, whereas
prior self-improving-agent and harness-optimization work mostly targets general coding, terminal, or
reasoning benchmarks. We evaluate two variants to separate gains from improved prose grounding
versus the broader self-evolved package.

SE: self-evolved combined adapter. SE is produced by the offline pipeline that iteratively rewrites
the adapter contents, including a richer task primer (system prompt element) and agent-authored
auxiliary skills, scoring candidate revisions by resulting quality on a held-out training-set. At
evaluation time we disable skill invocation with –disallowedTools Skill so that SE has the same
tool shape as the factorial cells; any gain in the main comparison therefore reflects the evolved adapter
contents rather than an additional class of runtime tools.

SE-prose: prose-only self-evolved variant. SE-prose isolates the textual part of the self-evolved
adapter: it takes only the rewritten primer and cheatsheet from SE and inserts them into an otherwise
standard S+X+M cell. Comparing SE-prose with S+X+M tests whether self-evolution improves the
always-visible grounding instructions and procedural memory; comparing SE-prose with SE tests
whether any remaining gain comes from the broader self-evolved package beyond prose and memory.

5     Experiments
5.1   Experimental Design

Our experiments are designed to separate three questions that are often conflated in simulator-agent
evaluation: whether the adapter improves final deck quality, whether it improves reliability by
preventing catastrophic invalid outputs, and which simulator-interface failures remain unsolved. We
first run a controlled factorial ablation on GEOS to estimate the effect of each grounding component.
We then analyze failure categories to identify the residual bottlenecks. Finally, we calibrate the
task against human domain users, test behavior under underspecified briefs, and run two cross-
simulator transfer studies (OpenFOAM and LAMMPS) to probe whether the dominant mechanism is
GEOS-specific.
The results answer five research questions: RQ1: Reliability and quality. Does SIGA improve
TreeSim, and is the gain driven by average quality or by fewer catastrophic failures? RQ2: Failure
mechanisms. Which block-level or attribute-level errors are fixed by the adapter? RQ3: Human
anchor. How does SIGA compare with domain experts on a representative GEOS deck-authoring
task? RQ4: Autonomy. When task briefs are underspecified, does the agent consult a human
supervisor or substitute other available information sources? RQ5: Transfer. Does the same
grounding mechanism transfer to other simulator interfaces (OpenFOAM, LAMMPS), and does the
dominant component shift with the interface?

5.2   Ablation design and bottleneck analysis

Cells. To attribute the contribution of each grounding component, we run a detailed factorial ablation
across the four binary factors {R, S, X, M}. A standard one-factor-at-a-time ablation (stacking each
component on, or stripping it from the full stack) is the cheapest design, but it cannot disambiguate
main effects from two-factor interactions: if R and S help only when combined, neither single-factor
ablation reveals this. The full 24 = 16-cell factorial does, at the cost of substantially more runs. We
instead use a Resolution-IV 24−1 fraction with generator D=ABC, which gives us eight cells whose


                                                   7
main effects are not confounded with two-factor interactions, recovering most of the information of
the full factorial at half the compute. Cells are named by their active factors, e.g., X + M; Vanilla
is all-off. We add three cells: S + X + M, the predicted main-effects-best corner missing from the
fraction; SE-prose, which inserts the self-evolved v3 primer and cheatsheet into an otherwise standard
S + X + M cell; and SE, the full self-evolved combined adapter. Because S and X both use xmllint,
the X main effect partly conflates agent-callable validation with hook-time schema validation when S
is also enabled (App. F).
Bottleneck analysis. We attribute score differences to structural failure modes in three
steps (schema and prompts in App. B). First, an LLM-free extractor identifies top-K fail-
ing subtrees from treesim_detail and adds trajectory features from events.jsonl. Sec-
ond, deepseek-v4-flash assigns each (cell, run, task) to one category: missing_block,
extra_block, hallucinated_extras, structural_mismatch, bad_attribute_value,
partial_implementation, wrong_constitutive, or no_failure. Third, deepseek-v4-pro
summarizes per-cell distributions and baseline-vs-best deltas. Total cost is ∼650 flash calls plus 4
pro calls ($5–7).
Splits and leakage control. From the 46-task pool we reserve 10 tasks for held-out evaluation, 18
for distillation, and 17 for validation-selection, dropping one task (App. A). No validation or held-
out-eval task is used for distillation. A hygiene gate regex-scans distilled artifacts for ground-truth
test filenames and rejects leaks. (It was added after an earlier cheatsheet leaked 13/17 validation-task
basenames.)

5.3   GEOS benchmark and evaluation protocol

We evaluate on two GEOS task splits. The validation (val) split contains 17 in-distribution tasks
from advanced examples and tutorials, covering poromechanics, hydraulic fracture, thermal coupling,
and wellbore modeling. This split is used for component selection but not for memory distillation.
The held-out-eval split contains 10 harder tasks reserved for final evaluation and is never used for
distillation, self-evolution, or cell tuning.
Generated decks are scored with TreeSim, a recursive tree-similarity metric in [0, 1] over the parsed
XML deck (full definition and scorer in App. G). Each XML element is a node labeled by its tag and
name attribute; <Included> directives are resolved and a deck’s files are merged under a synthetic
root, so file-level (single file) and deck-level (full directory) scores use the same procedure. Same-tag
children are matched by greedy unordered bipartite matching on a tag-plus-attribute similarity, so
sibling order does not affect the score. A node’s score blends its own attribute similarity a (a Jaccard-
style overlap of attribute keys, values compared by case-insensitive string match or relative numeric
tolerance) with the mean score of its matched children,
                                                     nextra
              s = α a + (1 − α) s̄child − β                    ,      α = 0.3, β = 0.1,              (3)
                                                  ngt + nextra
clamped to [0, 1], where leaves use s = a, unmatched ground-truth children contribute 0 to s̄child ,
and nextra surplus generated children incur the penalty term. The deck score is the root node’s score;
per-section scores are the scores of the ten top-level children. We report failures-as-zero: parse
errors, timeouts, missing XML outputs, and empty outputs all receive score 0. This convention is
important because simulator setup is only useful when the returned workspace is at least structurally
inspectable.
The main baseline is vanilla Claude Code with all SIGA components disabled. All headline GEOS
experiments use deepseek-v4-flash with three runs per cell and a 1500-second timeout. SE and
SE-prose use the same evaluation budget and disable skill invocation for parity.

6     Results
The main empirical finding is that simulator-interface grounding’s largest gain is reliability. On
in-distribution GEOS tasks, vanilla Claude Code already achieves high TreeSim. On harder held-out
tasks, SIGA reduces catastrophic invalid or incomplete outputs, which raises mean performance and
sharply reduces across-run variance. We further localize the residual errors to attribute-level semantic
mistakes (§6.2), which marks where future grounding can extend the gains.


                                                   8
Table 1: Cell-level TreeSim (failures-as-zero) on deepseek-v4-flash, n = 3 runs (mean ± sample
std). The left block indicates which grounding components are present in each cell (• on, blank
off): Retrieval (semantic search over GEOS artifacts), Refine loop (schema-validating termination
hook), Validator (the same schema check exposed as an agent-callable tool), and Memory (procedural-
memory cheatsheet appended to the system prompt). The first eight rows are a Resolution-IV 24−1
fractional factorial; S+X+M fills the main-effects-best corner missing from the fraction; Self-Evolve-
prose substitutes the self-evolved primer and cheatsheet into an otherwise standard S+X+M cell;
Self-Evolve is the full self-evolved adapter (the two are abbreviated SE-prose and SE elsewhere). ∆ =
cell mean minus Vanilla mean on the same split.
                                       Components                                           TreeSim
  Cell                Retrieval   Refine loop Validator   Memory         val          held-out-eval   ∆ val    ∆ held-out
  Vanilla                                                            0.910 ± 0.024   0.720 ± 0.081      –         –
  R+M                    •                                  •        0.885 ± 0.014         –          −0.025      –
  S+M                                 •                     •        0.919 ± 0.004         –          +0.009      –
  R+S                    •            •                              0.857 ± 0.045         –          −0.053      –
  X+M                                             •         •       0.921 ± 0.007    0.768 ± 0.005    +0.011    +0.048
  R+X                    •                        •                  0.893 ± 0.033         –          −0.017      –
  S+X                                 •           •                  0.917 ± 0.004   0.781 ± 0.002    +0.007    +0.061
  R+S+X+M                •            •           •         •        0.885 ± 0.008         –          −0.025      –
  S+X+M                               •           •         •       0.911 ± 0.018     0.783 ± 0.022   +0.001    +0.063
  Self-Evolve-prose                   •           •         •       0.897 ± 0.032     0.775 ± 0.024   −0.013    +0.055
  Self-Evolve                         •           •         •       0.919 ± 0.020    0.789 ± 0.012    +0.009    +0.069




6.1      Reliability is SIGA’s biggest gain (RQ1)

Table 1 reports headline numbers (n = 3). Cells cluster narrowly on val (0.857 to 0.921; 0.910 to
0.921 for sans-semantic-retrieval) but spread more on held-out-eval (0.720 to 0.789, ∆ = +0.069
Vanilla to SE). The gap between these two columns, more than the absolute level of either, is the
headline finding: the adapters’ contribution is largely reliability rather than uniform quality lift.
Hard-tail rescue. The bare harness’s high across-run variance on held-out-eval comes from a small
number of catastrophic outputs, not from broad spread: the agent occasionally terminates with an
empty or unparseable deck that scores 0, and a single such run inflates the standard deviation for the
whole cell. The adapters’ first-order job is to prevent these zero-score terminations, which is why they
cut across-run standard deviation by roughly an order of magnitude (e.g. Vanilla σ = 0.081, driven
by one unparseable ExampleProppantTest run, falls to σ = 0.005 under X+M and σ = 0.002
under S+X) and lift the mean on the harder split by rescuing the would-be zero-score runs. Per-
task inspection (Table 6) shows the +0.069 Vanilla-to-SE aggregate gain on held-out-eval is driven
primarily by two catastrophic-failure rescues (AdvancedExampleThermoPoroElasticWellbore
from 0.355 to 0.761; ExampleProppantTest from 0.541 to 0.825), alongside one universal failure
(TutorialHydraulicFractureWithAdvancedXML at 0.013 across every cell) and within-noise
differences on the remaining tasks. The adapters rescue the bare model from these catastrophic
failures rather than uniformly raising scores: where the bare model already has a usable template, the
adapter is operating in run-to-run noise.
Val ceiling. On the validation split (val), where the bare harness already operates near a quality
ceiling, the absolute-score improvements from any single component are subtle. The best val cell
(X+M) beats Vanilla by +0.011, within run-to-run variation; this is a modest absolute lift, and the
headline contribution on val is again reliability (variance across runs) and efficiency (§6.2) rather
than absolute quality. The largest Resolution-IV main effect on val is R (∆ = −0.037); the other
three are small (X +0.011, M +0.008, S −0.008), all within ±0.011 of zero.

      Answer to RQ1. SIGA’s largest gain is reliability: on held-out-eval it shrinks across-run
      variance by roughly an order of magnitude and rescues two compound multi-physics tasks from
      catastrophic failure. On the in-distribution split the bare harness already sits near a quality
      ceiling, so the absolute-quality lift there is small.


6.2      Schema-aware adapters fix block-level omissions (RQ2)

The per-task error classifier (App. B.1) reveals four patterns. (1) Adapters fix missing_block:
counts drop 6 to 3 on val between Vanilla and X+M (whole Solvers, Events, or Constitutive


                                                                9
omissions); the cheatsheet enumerates these canonical blocks and the validator’s structural pressure
discourages finishing without them. (2) Adapters do not fully resolve bad_attribute_value (12
/ 11 / 15 across Vanilla / X+M / S+X): schema validation cannot prevent TPFAstabilization
substituted for contactStabilization or a hallucinated gravityVector. (3) Adapters trade
catastrophic absence for content imprecision: as missing_block drops, extra_block rises 9 to 11
and hallucinated_extras rises 4 to 7, yielding small mean lift but large reliability lift. (4) Strictly
perfect tasks (TreeSim ≥ 0.999) do not increase under any adapter (Vanilla 7/51, X+M 6/51, SE
6/51).
Two points put the persistent bad_attribute_value count in context. First, choosing the right
attribute value is intrinsically harder than including the right block: the correct value often follows
from domain knowledge that the schema and the shipped documentation do not encode, such as
a physically appropriate solver tolerance, permeability, or constitutive choice. Closing this gap is
therefore less a matter of a stricter validator than of supplying the relevant domain sources (e.g.
from primary literature) or adding scientific-reasoning capability, both of which are engineering
directions beyond the present grounding layer. Second, the roughly flat count is partly mechanical:
as the adapters fill in previously-missing blocks, more attributes are now present to be judged at all,
so a near-constant bad_attribute_value count alongside falling missing_block reflects more
attributes being inferred rather than a regression. The adapters thus remove the most egregious,
whole-block errors and leave a relatively more minor, attribute-level residue, which we read as the
next problem to solve rather than a shortcoming of the approach.


Efficiency. Adapter cells are no more expensive than Vanilla in wall-clock (App. L). This matched-
efficiency outcome is itself a feature rather than a null finding. A common failure mode in LLM-
reflection-driven harness optimization is over-specification, where iteratively tacked-on small features
end up derailing or slowing down workflows, so a non-trivial design constraint is that the adapter
not impose runtime overhead beyond the bare harness. Our adapters meet this constraint: cheatsheet
cells make about half as many free-form Read calls because the cheatsheet short-circuits exploratory
file access; xmllint cells make roughly 3 schema-validation calls per task; RAG cells make 12 to 13
retrieval calls and run faster but score lower. SE makes fewer tool calls than Vanilla on val (68.9 vs
81.5, −15.5%) but more on held-out-eval (97.4 vs 90.5, +7.6%); the val efficiency does not transfer
to the harder task split, consistent with the broader pattern that adapter wins are tail-localised.

      Answer to RQ2. Schema-aware adapters reliably fix block-level omissions and add no wall-
      clock overhead. The residual errors are attribute-level: assigning physically correct values is a
      harder, domain-knowledge-bound problem that the schema does not constrain, and it is a less
      severe error class than whole-block omission. We see it as the next frontier for grounding rather
      than a limitation of the recipe.


6.3     Human baseline: SIGA reaches expert deck quality faster (RQ3)

To anchor agent TreeSim in human terms, two geoscience-domain-expert volunteers (Expert 1,
Expert 2; graduate-level geoscientists, new to GEOS) attempted buckleyLeverettProblem (1D
immiscible CO2 /brine displacement, the easy end of our bench) in a single one-hour session, using the
same primer, filtered source tree, and contamination block as the agent and working primarily from
the GEOS documentation and source tree. Expert 1 returned with no time cap as an extended-budget
check, and we collected a written estimate from a GEOS expert and developer to anchor experienced
users (App. J).
Each one-hour session opened with roughly ten minutes of task explanation and environment setup; in
the authoring time that remained, both experts completed only base.xml (the first of the two required
files), spending the latter part of the session on the Outputs and Events blocks. File-level TreeSim
is 0.812 (Expert 1) and 0.781 (Expert 2); deck-level collapses to 0.540 and 0.527 since the second
file is missing (Table 2). On the same task, vanilla Claude Code reaches file-level 0.889 ± 0.023 and
deck-level 0.751 ± 0.016 in roughly 7 min; SIGA X+M reaches at least 0.90 on both. The single-file
outcome reflects the one-hour budget, not capacity: Expert 1, in an uncapped follow-up session,
produced both files in about 3 hours and reached deck-level 0.931, at parity with SIGA X+M but at
roughly 36× the wall-clock. The GEOS developer estimate brackets an experienced GEOS user at


                                                    10
under 30 min for simple Buckley–Leverett and “a couple of days” for compound multi-physics decks,
lining up with the hard-tail held-out-eval result.

Table 2: Human baseline on buckleyLeverettProblem. Quality columns are TreeSim (higher
is better, ↑): file-level is GT base.xml vs the participant’s base.xml; deck-level is the full GT
directory vs the submitted directory. The Efficiency column is wall-clock minutes to a final deck
(lower is better, ↓). Agent rows from per-task deepseek-v4-flash numbers.

                                                     Quality (↑ better)           Efficiency (↓ better)
       Author                               File-level (base) ↑    Deck-level ↑          Wall (min) ↓
       Expert 1 (1 h session)                          0.812              0.540                  48.2
       Expert 2 (1 h session)                          0.781              0.527                  46.7
       Expert 1 (no time cap, both files)              0.689              0.931                 ∼180
       Vanilla CC (deepseek-v4-flash)          0.889 ± 0.023      0.751 ± 0.016                   ≈7
       SIGA X+M (deepseek-v4-flash)                   ≥ 0.90             ≥ 0.90                   ≈5

Browser histories show humans browsing Sphinx prose to assemble decks from concept descriptions,
while the agent analogises from prior decks via the source tree (App. J). Part of the SIGA contribution
is giving the agent a structured way to do what humans approximate via Sphinx browsing under time
pressure. We treat this as an existence-of-effect calibration, not a head-to-head ranking.

      Answer to RQ3. The SIGA-equipped agent reaches the deck-level quality of an extended-
      budget domain expert on this representative task at roughly 1/36 the wall-clock, and operates
      inside the experienced-GEOS-user time envelope for simple Buckley–Leverett deck authoring.


6.4     Exploring agent autonomy: human consultation is under-utilized in hard settings (RQ4)

Motivation. Our headline benchmark hands the agent a fully detailed task brief in a single turn,
by design: this standardised setup removes potential ambiguity and confounders, so any difference
between adapter cells is attributable to the adapter rather than to varying levels of underspecification.
In this regime the agent’s responsibility is narrowed to translation: it is told exactly which simulation
to run, and only needs to express it in GEOS’s DSL. Eventually, however, we want to expand the
scope of the agent’s responsibility so that it can take on more of the workflow and be correspondingly
more useful to a working scientist. Loosening the brief naturally introduces ambiguity that a human
scientist collaborator would otherwise resolve. We explore this direction by producing alternative
specifications that specify less and less of the task, requiring the agent to figure out more on its
own, and observing when and how the agent chooses to consult a human expert user to resolve the
ambiguities it encounters.
Protocol. We probe this with a single-run companion study (8 val tasks, 2 configurations × 2 relax-
ation levels × 2 interaction modes, 64 runs; App. I). Briefs are tier-rewritten by deepseek-v4-pro:
Medium drops T1 (software defaults) and T2 (standard numerics), 89 values (−21% chars); Hard
additionally drops T3 (domain-inferable physicals), 184 values (−50%). Configurations are Vanilla
and X+M; the interactive mode exposes a consult_supervisor MCP tool whose handler invokes
a separate deepseek-v4-flash prompted with the full original brief.
Results. Across 64 interactive trials the agent invoked the exposed human-consultation tool only
twice (3.1%), a rate that is robust to prompt framing. The 31/32 silent runs were not silent for lack of
questions: agents read 142 to 404 GEOS example XMLs per cell and copied values from analogous
benchmarks. A neutral-framing rerun (no “prefer to infer” language) leaves the rate unchanged at
1/32, ruling out prompt-induced reluctance. A Mandel/Hard diagnostic shows 15 of 26 dropped
values appear by literal-token grep in other readable GEOS examples, so the on-disk library is
acting as a cheaper retrieval substitute for human consultation. TreeSim drops mildly with relaxation
(X+M: 0.829 Medium, 0.835 Hard, vs 0.921 at Easy), and interactive variants are within ±1pp of
non-interactive: the agent reaches the same place whether or not the human channel exists.

      Answer to RQ4. “Decide when to consult human oversight” is not a free-standing agent
      capability in this setting; it is conditional on whether the agent has access to an alternative



                                                     11
Table 3: OpenFOAM transfer study on the 30-task n30_hybrid benchmark (deepseek-v4-flash,
single run). Mean score is the file-text-and-coverage metric. Full cov = tasks with all required files
produced; Zero = zero-score tasks. Eight rows form the Resolution-IV 24−1 fraction and S+X+M is
an additional hand-selected cell (nine SIGA cells total); the last two are OpenFOAM-native agents in
lint-only mode. Est. cost is the per-row total over all 30 tasks, recomputed from logged input/output
tokens at OpenRouter DeepSeek V4 Flash pricing.

  System                          Mean score ↑       Full cov ↑     Zero ↓     Wall s    Est. cost ($)
  SIGA R+S                                0.870           30/30       0/30      263.5             2.61
  SIGA S+X                                 0.866          30/30       0/30      469.8             3.68
  SIGA R+S+X+M                             0.854          30/30       0/30      376.9             3.81
  SIGA S+X+M                               0.847          30/30       0/30      495.4             3.65
  SIGA S+M                                 0.835          30/30       0/30      429.5             3.29
  SIGA X+M                                 0.697          30/30       0/30      236.0             2.04
  SIGA R+M                                 0.689          30/30       0/30      220.8             1.15
  SIGA R+X                                 0.685          30/30       0/30      179.2             1.62
  SIGA Vanilla                             0.681          30/30       0/30      196.3             1.36
  Foam-Agent 2.0 (lint)                    0.516          19/30       8/30      373.0             0.30
  MetaOpenFOAM (lint)                      0.379          10/30      12/30      431.5             0.17


      oracle. The on-disk example library acts as a cheaper retrieval substitute for human consultation,
      so studies measuring consultation behaviour without controlling for executable-example-library
      access are measuring the substitute, not the consultation. This is also a benchmark-design
      lesson: eliciting genuine consultation requires tasks whose missing information cannot be
      recovered from accessible examples, so that asking a human is the only reliable path. Our
      relaxed briefs did not clear that bar, the agent judged them close enough to examples it could
      already read, so designing tasks that force a real ambiguity is itself an open methodological
      problem.

6.5     Transfer to OpenFOAM: SIGA produces complete cases where native agents fail (RQ5)

We first ask whether the dominant SIGA mechanism is specific to GEOS’s XML/XSD interface
or reflects a broader adapter principle: forcing the agent to satisfy simulator-specific completion
checks before termination. We port {R, S, X, M} to OpenFOAM case authoring and run a 30-task
study drawn from a FoamGPT-derived benchmark, using a single run, deepseek-v4-flash, and a
file-text-and-coverage metric (0.7 · mean similarity + 0.3 · coverage; App. D). To place the result
against simulator-native systems, we additionally run two from-scratch OpenFOAM agents, Foam-
Agent [Yue et al., 2025b] and MetaOpenFOAM [Chen et al., 2024a], both in lint-only execution
mode (the stable mode available in our environment), under the same benchmark and metric with
matched token instrumentation.
The pattern matches the GEOS reliability result and now stands out against external baselines (Table 3).
The best OpenFOAM cell, R+S, reaches mean 0.870, and every SIGA cell, including Vanilla, produces
all required files on all 30 tasks with no zero-score outputs. The two native agents fail exactly there:
Foam-Agent reaches 0.516 (19/30 full coverage, 8 zero-score) and MetaOpenFOAM 0.379 (10/30
full coverage, 12 zero-score), and their score collapses are dominated by missing-required-file failures
rather than textual mismatch. Among SIGA cells the stop-hook carries the quality gain: the S factor
appears in all five top cells, and a factor-style readout assigns S the largest positive effect (+0.168
mean) while R (+0.005), X (+0.007), and M (−0.007) are near zero (App. D). The harness buys
this coverage with cost: the SIGA cells run roughly an order of magnitude more expensive per task
than the native agents, which resend less context per turn.

      Answer to RQ5 (OpenFOAM). The dominant GEOS mechanism transfers: forced end-of-turn
      verification (S) is again the strongest component, and across 30 tasks the SIGA harness returns
      complete, structurally valid cases on every task while two OpenFOAM-native agents, in our



                                                     12
Table 4: LAMMPS transfer headline (9 tasks, single run, LLM-judge mean in [0, 10]). Two backbones;
the best SIGA configuration is the one with the highest mean for that backbone (for Claude, M+R
and M+R+S+X tie at 6.89; we list M+R). Structural scores are near-ceiling (≥ 0.976) for all cells, so
the differentiation is in judged value-correctness. Full per-cell results in App. E.

                  Backbone            Best SIGA cell     Vanilla ↑   Best SIGA ↑   Gain
                  deepseek-v4-flash   M+R+S+X                4.56          7.78    +3.22
                  Claude Sonnet 4.6   M+R                    6.33          6.89    +0.56


      lint-only reproduction, leave 8–12 tasks with missing required files. The transferable principle
      is the completeness gate, instantiated as XSD validity in GEOS and required-file/dictionary
      coverage in OpenFOAM.

6.6     Transfer to LAMMPS: the dominant component shifts to knowledge injection (RQ5)

We next port {R, S, X, M} to LAMMPS molecular-dynamics input-script authoring on a 9-task
benchmark spanning diverse MD physics (single run, LLM-judge metric in [0, 10]; App. E). To probe
transfer across both simulator and model family, we run 12 configurations across two backbone
models, Claude Sonnet 4.6 and deepseek-v4-flash (both inside the Claude Code harness). The
recipe transfers, but with a shifted factor profile (Table 4). On DeepSeek the full stack reaches mean
7.78 versus 4.56 for the bare agent, a 3.2-point gain; on Claude the best cell reaches 6.89 versus 6.33,
a smaller margin because the bare Claude agent already assigns mostly correct parameter values. A
factor-style readout on DeepSeek assigns the largest effect to M (+2.13), then R (+1.55), with S and
X positive but smaller; on Claude all effects are small (at most 0.52 in magnitude). Unlike GEOS and
OpenFOAM, where forced verification (S) dominated, the LAMMPS gain is informational, supplied
by memory and retrieval: correct unit conventions, ensemble syntax, and task-specific command
patterns. Structural scores are near ceiling across all 12 configurations (≥ 0.976), confirming that the
agents reliably emit complete scripts and that the residual errors are wrong parameter values rather
than omitted components, which is why knowledge injection rather than completeness enforcement
carries the signal here.

      Answer to RQ5 (LAMMPS). The recipe transfers across simulator and model family, but the
      dominant component shifts: when scripts are already structurally complete and the bottleneck
      is value-correctness, procedural memory (M, +2.13 on DeepSeek) and retrieval (R, +1.55)
      carry the gain rather than the stop-hook. A DeepSeek agent at 4.56 unguided reaches 7.78 with
      the full adapter through informational scaffolding alone.


7      Broader impact
Lowering the configuration barrier could accelerate legitimate research (CO2 storage, geothermal,
induced seismicity) but could also enable less careful studies. Human expert review remains important;
we frame the system as an assistant. Limitations, an extended cross-simulator analysis, the procedural-
memory-tool negative result, and concrete adapter-design recommendations are collected in App. F.

8      Conclusion
We asked how far an off-the-shelf coding agent can be pushed for scientific simulator setup by wrapper-
level grounding alone, taking GEOS deck authoring as our case study. On in-distribution tasks the
bare harness already operates near a quality ceiling; on harder held-out compound multi-physics tasks
our adapters lift mean TreeSim by roughly seven percentage points and reduce across-run variance
by roughly an order of magnitude, largely by preventing the harness from occasionally returning
unparseable or empty decks. Schema-driven adapters eliminate whole-block omissions, and transfer
studies on OpenFOAM (30 tasks, where SIGA returns complete cases that two native agents do
not) and LAMMPS (where memory and retrieval, not the completeness gate, carry the gain) show
the recipe carries over while its dominant component adapts to each interface’s binding constraint.
As an application, SIGA brings deck authoring inside the time envelope of an experienced GEOS


                                                    13
user, and for domain experts who are new to the simulator it compresses a multi-hour authoring
task into minutes (a ∼36× speedup at matched deck quality on our representative task); as an initial
AI-for-science contribution, it argues that the advanced tool-operating bottleneck deserves deliberate
attention before agents are entrusted with harder scientific reasoning, and that adapting an existing
engineered harness is a viable alternative to rebuilding agents from scratch for each new scientific
target.


References
S. Alber, B. Chen, E. Sun, A. Isakova, A. J. Wilk, and J. Zou. Cellvoyager: Ai compbio agent
   generates new insights by autonomously analyzing biological data. Nature Methods, pages 1–11,
   2026.
Y. W. Bekele. Geosim.ai: Ai assistants for numerical simulations in geomechanics, 2025. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.14186.
D. A. Boiko, R. MacKnight, B. Kline, and G. Gomes. Autonomous chemical research with large
  language models. Nature, 624:570–578, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06792-0.
A. M. Bran, S. Cox, O. Schilter, C. Baldassari, A. D. White, and P. Schwaller. Chemcrow: Augment-
  ing large-language models with chemistry tools, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.
  05376.
X. Chen, M. Lin, N. Schärli, and D. Zhou. Teaching large language models to self-debug, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.05128.
Y. Chen, X. Zhu, H. Zhou, and Z. Ren. Metaopenfoam: an llm-based multi-agent framework for cfd,
   2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21320.
Z. Chen, S. Chen, Y. Ning, Q. Zhang, B. Wang, B. Yu, Y. Li, Z. Liao, C. Wei, Z. Lu, V. Dey, M. Xue,
   F. N. Baker, B. Burns, D. Adu-Ampratwum, X. Huang, X. Ning, S. Gao, Y. Su, and H. Sun.
   Scienceagentbench: Toward rigorous assessment of language agents for data-driven scientific
   discovery, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.05080.
Cursor Research, A. Chan, A. Shalaby, A. Wettig, A. Sanger, A. Zhai, A. Ajay, A. Nair, C. Snell,
  C. Lu, C. Shen, E. Jia, F. Cassano, H. Liu, H. Chen, H. Wildermuth, J. Jackson, J. Li, J. Katz, J. Yao,
  J. Hejna, J. Warner, J. Vering, K. Frans, L. Danilek, L. Wright, L. Cen, L. Melas-Kyriazi, M. Truell,
  M. de Jong, N. Jain, N. Schmidt, N. Wang, N. Muennighoff, O. Rybkin, P. Loh, P. Kravtsov,
  R. Yadav, S. Shah, S. Kottler, A. M. Rush, S. Zhang, S. Jain, S. Sankar, S. Heule, S. H. Sul,
  S. Asif, V. Rong, W. Zhu, W. Lin, Y. Wu, Y. Volkov, Y. Zemlyanskiy, Z. Holbrook, and Z. Zhang.
  Composer 2 technical report, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.24477.
C. Deng, T. Zhang, Z. He, Y. Xu, Q. Chen, Y. Shi, L. Fu, W. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Zhou, Z. Lin, and
  J. He. K2: A foundation language model for geoscience knowledge understanding and utilization,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05064.
GEOS Development Team. GEOS: A multiphysics simulation framework for subsurface applications,
 2024. URL https://github.com/GEOS-DEV/GEOS.
S. Guilbert, C. Masschelein, J. Goumaz, B. Naida, and P. Schwaller. Dynamate: An autonomous
   agent for protein-ligand molecular dynamics simulations, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
   2512.10034.
E. Holbrook, J. C. Verduzco, and A. Strachan. Evaluating llm-generated code for domain-specific
  languages: molecular dynamics with lammps, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.
  20630.
Y. Huang, J. Luo, Y. Yu, Y. Zhang, F. Lei, Y. Wei, S. He, L. Huang, X. Liu, J. Zhao, and K. Liu.
  Da-code: Agent data science code generation benchmark for large language models, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.07331.
Y. Lee, R. Nair, Q. Zhang, K. Lee, O. Khattab, and C. Finn. Meta-harness: End-to-end optimization
   of model harnesses, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.28052.


                                                  14
P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. Küttler, M. Lewis, W. tau Yih,
   T. Rocktäschel, S. Riedel, and D. Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive
   nlp tasks, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401.
Z. Li, H. Zhang, S. Han, S. Liu, J. Xie, Y. Zhang, Y. Choi, J. Zou, and P. Lu. In-the-flow agentic
  system optimization for effective planning and tool use. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2026.
K.-A. Lie, O. Møyner, E. Svee, and J. Torben. Agentic scientific simulation: Execution-grounded
  model construction and reconstruction, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.00214.
J. Lin, S. Liu, C. Pan, L. Lin, S. Dou, Z. Xi, X. Huang, H. Yan, Z. Han, T. Gui, and Y.-G. Jiang.
   Agentic harness engineering: Observability-driven automatic evolution of coding-agent harnesses,
   2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.25850.
Z. Lin, C. Deng, L. Zhou, T. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y. Xu, Z. He, Y. Shi, B. Dai, Y. Song, B. Zeng, Q. Chen,
  Y. Miao, B. Xue, S. Wang, L. Fu, W. Zhang, J. He, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, and C. Zhou. Geogalactica:
  A scientific large language model in geoscience, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.
   00434.
C. Lu, C. Lu, R. T. Lange, J. Foerster, J. Clune, and D. Ha. The ai scientist: Towards fully automated
  open-ended scientific discovery, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.06292.
S. Narayanan, J. D. Braza, R.-R. Griffiths, M. Ponnapati, A. Bou, J. Laurent, O. Kabeli, G. Wellawatte,
   S. Cox, S. G. Rodriques, and A. D. White. Aviary: training language agents on challenging
   scientific tasks, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.21154.
B. Ni and M. J. Buehler. Mechagents: Large language model multi-agent collaborations can
  solve mechanics problems, generate new data, and integrate knowledge, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2311.08166.
X. Ning, K. Tieu, D. Fu, T. Wei, Z. Li, Y. Bei, J. Zou, M. Ai, Z. Liu, T.-W. Li, L. Chen, Y. Zhao,
  K. Yang, B. Li, C. Qian, G. Li, X. Lin, Z. Zeng, R. Qiu, S. Chen, Y. Sun, X. Yang, R. Wang, R. Pan,
  C. Yang, D. Zhang, L. Fang, Z. Cui, Y. Cao, P. Chen, D. Sun, R. Chen, M. Srinivasan, N. Mathur,
  Y. Xia, H. Li, H. Yan, P. Lu, L. Zhang, T. Zhang, H. Tong, and J. He. Code as agent harness, 2026.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.18747.
S. Pandey, R. Xu, W. Wang, and X. Chu. Openfoamgpt: A retrieval-augmented large language model
   (llm) agent for openfoam-based computational fluid dynamics. Physics of Fluids, 37(3), Mar. 2025.
   ISSN 1089-7666. doi: 10.1063/5.0257555. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/5.0257555.
D. Park, H. Moon, and S. Ryu. A self-correcting multi-agent LLM framework for language-based
  physics simulation and explanation. npj Artificial Intelligence, 2(1):10, 2026. doi: 10.1038/
  s44387-025-00057-z.
Y. Ren, S. Yu, K. Chen, and J. Ma. Seismology modeling agent: A smart assistant for geophysical
   researchers, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.14429.
Z. Shi, H. A, Y. Shao, D. Huang, H. An, C. Xin, H. Shen, Z. Wang, Y. Na, G. Huang, and X. Jing.
  Mdagent2: Large language model for code generation and knowledge q&a in molecular dynamics,
  2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.02075.
X. Tang, W. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Guo, D. Shao, J. Chen, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, G. Wan, W. Zhang,
  L. Bai, Z. Yin, P. Torr, H. Wang, and D. Jin. Eigen-1: Adaptive multi-agent refinement with
  monitor-based rag for scientific reasoning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.21193.
X. Wang, B. Li, Y. Song, F. F. Xu, X. Tang, M. Zhuge, J. Pan, Y. Song, B. Li, J. Singh, H. H. Tran,
  F. Li, R. Ma, M. Zheng, B. Qian, Y. Shao, N. Muennighoff, Y. Zhang, B. Hui, J. Lin, R. Brennan,
  H. Peng, H. Ji, and G. Neubig. Openhands: An open platform for ai software developers as
  generalist agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16741.
Y. Yamada, R. T. Lange, C. Lu, S. Hu, C. Lu, J. Foerster, J. Clune, and D. Ha. The ai scientist-
  v2: Workshop-level automated scientific discovery via agentic tree search, 2025. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2504.08066.


                                                  15
J. Yang, C. E. Jimenez, A. Wettig, K. Lieret, S. Yao, K. Narasimhan, and O. Press. Swe-agent:
   Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.
   org/abs/2405.15793.
L. Yang, Z. Yu, T. Zhang, S. Cao, M. Xu, W. Zhang, J. E. Gonzalez, and B. Cui. Buffer of
  thoughts: Thought-augmented reasoning with large language models, 2024b. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2406.04271.
Y. Yang, Z. Gong, W. Huang, Q. Yang, Z. Zhou, Z. Huang, Y. Li, X. Gao, Q. Dai, B. Liu, K. Qiu,
  Y. Yang, D. Chen, X. Yang, and C. Luo. Skillopt: Executive strategy for self-evolving agent skills,
   2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.23904.
L. Yue, N. Somasekharan, T. Zhang, Y. Cao, Z. Chen, S. Di, and S. Pan. Foam-agent: Towards
  automated intelligent cfd workflows, 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04997.
L. Yue, N. Somasekharan, T. Zhang, Y. Cao, and S. Pan. Foam-agent 2.0: An end-to-end composable
   multi-agent framework for automating cfd simulation in openfoam, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.
   org/abs/2509.18178.
T. Zhang and H. Sun. Scinav: A general agent framework for scientific coding tasks, 2026. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.20256.
T. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. Xin, and Y. Jiao. Mooseagent: A llm based multi-agent framework for automating
   moose simulation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.08621.
A. Zhao, A. Chandrasekhar, and A. B. Farimani. Polyjarvis: Llm agent for autonomous polymer md
  simulations, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.02537.


A     Benchmark details
A.1   Task pool, splits, and hygiene

The 46-task pool is mined from GEOS advanced examples and tutorial decks.
Ten tasks are held out as the held-out-evaluation pool (the same ten re-
ported as held-out-eval throughout; never used as in-context demonstrations dur-
ing the main GEOS runs):                       AdvancedExampleCasedThermoElasticWellbore,
AdvancedExamplePureThermalDiffusionWellbore, AdvancedExampleThermoPoroElasticWellbore,
AdvancedExampleViscoExtendedDruckerPrager,                     ExampleIsothermalHystInjection,
ExampleMCCWellbore,             ExampleProppantTest,             ExamplesingleFracCompression,
ExampleVerticalPoroElastoPlasticWellbore, TutorialHydraulicFractureWithAdvancedXML.
The remaining 36 are split by odd/even index (sorted by training-run TreeSim, failures-as-zero) into
an 18-task distillation corpus and a 17-task validation-selection set (one task dropped). Ground-truth
decks live at /data/shared/geophysics_agent_data/data/eval/experiments_gt/.

A.2   Spec versions (v1 vs v2)

Two instruction sets exist: v1 (original mined specs, used in pre-2026-04-21 deepseek runs) and
v2 (cleaner, more self-contained rewrites, used in all post-D-004 runs). Mid-project comparisons
that crossed the versions were contaminated; re-runs on v2 re-anchored the canonical baselines. All
numbers in this paper use v2.

B     Bottleneck-analysis pipeline (full)
Stage 1 (LLM-free extractor). For each (cell, run, task), the extractor walks the recursive
treesim_detail tree from the scorer and ranks subtrees by impact = (1 − score) · (ngt_children + 1),
returning the top-K. It also extracts trajectory features from events.jsonl: tool counts, file re-reads,
xmllint MCP calls, edit churn, grep/glob query distributions.
Stage 2 (deepseek-v4-flash per-task classifier). The extractor’s output, plus a focused
GT-vs-generated XML excerpt for the worst-scoring section when its score is below 0.7, is sent to


                                                  16
deepseek-v4-flash with a strict-JSON output schema. The model returns: failure_category
∈     {missing_block, extra_block, hallucinated_extras, structural_mismatch,
bad_attribute_value, partial_implementation, wrong_constitutive, no_failure}, a
primary_failure_section, a one-sentence root_cause, a trajectory_evidence citation,
and a would_have_helped hypothesis.
Stage 3 (deepseek-v4-pro
            P               synthesis). Per-cell category and section distributions, section “failure
weight” = tasks (1 − TreeSim) grouped by primary failing section, and per-task baseline-vs-best
deltas are sent to deepseek-v4-pro with an instruction to write a paper-grade synthesis anchored
on a chosen baseline/best pair. Total cost across all evaluations was ∼650 flash calls plus 4 pro
narratives, ∼$5–7 in DeepSeek API spend.
Code: scripts/bottleneck/{extract,llm_per_task,aggregate}.py.

B.1     Bottleneck failure-category counts (full)

Table 5: Failure-category counts per cell; categories with all-zero or unreported counts (no_failure,
wrong_constitutive) are omitted. val panel uses n = 51 tasks per cell (3×17); held-out-eval
panel uses n = 29–30 per cell (3×10 minus a small number of LLM-judge parse-failures).
                                         val (n = 51)                            held-out-eval (n = 30)
    Category                 Vanilla   S+M     X+M S+X    SE      Vanilla     X+M S+X S+X+M SE-prose               SE
    bad_attribute_value        12      12    11    15      9          5        7         5        8         0       0
    extra_block                9       8     11     5     10          9        4         4        6         7       5
    hallucinated_extras        4       8      7     -      -          0        0         0        0         3       4
    missing_block              6       4      3     2      -          4        5         7        7         7       4
    partial_implementation     7       9      6    10      9          1        0         4        3         3       5
    structural_mismatch        6       8      7    11      -          8        6         6        5         3       5



Table 6: Per-task held-out-eval TreeSim (mean across 3 runs), sorted ascending by Vanilla score. The
aggregate +0.069 Vanilla→SE gain is concentrated in the top two non-universal-failure tasks (rows
2–3); the remaining seven tasks show within-noise differences across cells.

    Task                                                 Vanilla      X+M          S+X       S+X+M    SE-prose     SE
    TutorialHydraulicFractureWithAdvancedXML                  0.013   0.013    0.013          0.013      0.013   0.013
    AdvancedExampleThermoPoroElasticWellbore                  0.355   0.680    0.681          0.708      0.743   0.761
    ExampleProppantTest                                       0.541   0.810    0.809          0.799      0.817   0.825
    ExampleIsothermalHystInjection                            0.755   0.747    0.751          0.750      0.769   0.717
    AdvancedExampleCasedThermoElasticWellbore                 0.847   0.807    0.923          0.919      0.877   0.886
    ExamplesingleFracCompression                              0.891   0.887    0.904          0.931      0.929   0.928
    ExampleVerticalPoroElastoPlasticWellbore                  0.909   0.903    0.906          0.891      0.834   0.944
    ExampleMCCWellbore                                        0.935   0.924    0.908          0.905      0.905   0.941
    AdvancedExamplePureThermalDiffusionWellbore               0.963   0.922    0.956          0.947      0.864   0.880
    AdvancedExampleViscoExtendedDruckerPrager                 0.986   0.991    0.963          0.964      0.999   0.996



C      Cross-model and cross-harness: full panels
Setup. Cross-model: n = 1 run of Vanilla, X+M, SE on val with two backbones (minimax-m2.7,
google/gemini-3-flash-preview) via OpenRouter, harness held at Claude Code, default-off
harness env (GEOS_HOOK_POSTTOOLUSE unset, autocamp-experiment-state parity). Cross-harness:
n = 3 runs of Vanilla and X+M on val with deepseek-v4-flash, harness varied between Claude
Code and OpenHands. Headline DSv4 numbers from Table 1 included for comparison.
R-factor cross-model corroboration (older runs). On a 35-task superset that overlaps val, the
retrieval plugin lifts +0.175 on deepseek-v3.2 (paired 35 tasks) and +0.115 on minimax-m2.7
(paired 15 tasks). Retrieval thus helps on weaker backbones even though its val main effect on the
near-ceiling deepseek-v4-flash is slightly negative; we report these older runs only as cross-model
corroboration and defer to the headline val results above.
Harness-less floor.    A one-shot direct-prompting baseline on minimax-m2.7
(scripts/harnessless_eval.py; deepseek-v4-flash not yet run in this configuration)


                                                         17
Table 7: Full cross-model and cross-harness panel. Counts in parentheses are task failures out of 17.

    Harness   Backbone                                 Vanilla            X+M                SE
    CC        deepseek-v4-flash (n = 3)             0.910 ± 0.024     0.921 ± 0.007     0.919 ± 0.020
    CC        minimax-m2.7 (n = 1)                   0.821 (1 fail)   0.867 (0 fails)   0.861 (0 fails)
    CC        gemini-3-flash-preview (n = 1)        0.768 (0 fails)   0.797 (0 fails)    0.757 (1 fail)
    OH        deepseek-v4-flash (n = 3)             0.856 ± 0.061     0.881 ± 0.023           –


reaches TreeSim = 0.333 on val. We treat this as a model-class lower bound rather than a per-model
floor.
Memory-as-retrieval negative result. An earlier version of our system exposed primer-like content
via an MCP memory_lookup tool with embedding top-k retrieval over the distilled corpus. Across
every test-set run in which this tool was available (the A4, A4′ , A5, M3-g conditions of the prior
campaign), the agent called the tool zero times. The tool was verified functional. Delivering the same
content through the always-on –append-system-prompt channel (i.e., the M factor in this paper)
is what produced any lift. We retain this as a clean negative result on retrieval-based memory for this
task–model class.

D     OpenFOAM transfer study
Motivation. The main paper studies SIGA on GEOS, where the executable interface is a structured
XML deck with an explicit XSD schema. To test whether the same adapter recipe transfers beyond
GEOS and beyond XML-backed simulator interfaces, we ran an OpenFOAM case-authoring compan-
ion study in a separate repository path (repo3_openfoam). The headline leaderboard is Table 3 in
the main text; this appendix gives the adaptation, the benchmark and metric, the two native baselines,
the factor readout, and the cost accounting.

OpenFOAM adaptation of R/S/X/M . We ported the same four binary factors to OpenFOAM
case authoring. R replaced the GEOS RAG collections with three ChromaDB collections over
OpenFOAM tutorial structure, detailed case snippets, and command/help text. M replaced the GEOS
memory cheatsheet with a lightweight always-on primer describing the standard OpenFOAM case
skeleton (0/, constant/, system/) and the relevant tutorial/source-tree locations. S replaced the
GEOS XML stop-hook with an OpenFOAM stop-hook that blocks turn completion if required files
are missing or if generated dictionaries fail heuristic structural checks. X replaced the xmllint
MCP with an agent-callable OpenFOAM validator using the same case checks as the hook. Because
OpenFOAM lacks a canonical XSD-style schema for the benchmark dictionaries, the OpenFOAM
validator checks required-file presence, balanced delimiters, FoamFile headers, and key dictionary
sections rather than schema compliance.

Benchmark and metric. The benchmark (foamgpt_subset_seed42_n30_hybrid) contains 30
tasks sampled from a FoamGPT-derived pool, spanning incompressible, compressible, multiphase,
combustion, heat-transfer, lagrangian, mesh, DNS, molecular-dynamics, and discrete-method solvers.
Each task specifies a set of required files. We score a run with a file-text-and-coverage metric: each
missing required file receives score 0; present files are compared to ground truth via normalized text
similarity; and the case score is
                         Score = 0.7 · mean_similarity + 0.3 · coverage.
This is analogous to failures-as-zero reporting but is not TreeSim. All three systems were re-run on
the same date on deepseek/deepseek-v4-flash via OpenRouter with robust token and tool-call
instrumentation added beforehand; cost is recomputed per row from logged input/output tokens at
OpenRouter DeepSeek V4 Flash effective pricing (input $0.0983/M, output $0.1966/M). Headline
scores shifted only modestly from a pre-instrumentation run (e.g., repo3 R+S 0.887 → 0.870),
within run-to-run variance of a stochastic model; the instrumentation change affects only token/cost
accounting, not scoring.

Native baselines. We compare against two from-scratch OpenFOAM agents, Foam-Agent [Yue
et al., 2025b] and MetaOpenFOAM [Chen et al., 2024a], both in lint-only execution mode. A caveat


                                                  18
that matters for interpretation: neither native workflow is lint-only by design (Foam-Agent runs a
fuller plan–write–execute–review loop); the stable comparison available in our environment used
execution_mode=lint_only, since execute-mode runs failed to yield usable benchmark outputs.
We therefore treat both as constrained baselines rather than full head-to-heads against their intended
execution-coupled workflows. Token counts for both are sourced from real provider usage metadata,
aggregated across every LLM service instance per task; tool-call columns are not directly comparable
across systems (different definitions) and we do not compare on them.

Coverage and failure analysis. The reliability contrast is in coverage. Every SIGA cell, including
Vanilla, holds 30/30 full required-file coverage with 0 zero-score tasks. Foam-Agent reaches 19/30 full
coverage with 8 zero-score tasks; several of its zero scores are completed runs that omitted required
paths (e.g. freeSpacePeriodic, squareBump, supersonicCorner, aachenBomb) rather than
crashes, which the coverage metric penalizes heavily. MetaOpenFOAM reaches 10/30 full coverage
with 12 zero-score tasks, its weakness again exact required-file coverage. In other words, the SIGA
harness eliminates the missing-required-file failure mode that dominates both native agents’ score
collapses, which is the OpenFOAM analogue of the GEOS hard-tail rescue.

Factor-style readout. Using the eight SIGA factorial cells and reporting single-run descriptive
main effects on mean score:
                    R : +0.005,     S : +0.168,     X : +0.007,     M : −0.007.
S is the dominant effect by an order of magnitude over the others, consistent with the GEOS finding
that a hard end-of-turn completeness gate, rather than optional retrieval or optional validation, is
the portable intervention. The S factor appears in all five top-scoring cells (R+S, S+X, R+S+X+M,
S+X+M, S+M).

Cost. The SIGA harness is the most expensive of the three per task: total $23.20 across all
nine cells (270 task-runs), because its agentic loop resends the growing context each tool turn and
the OpenRouter DeepSeek route reports no prompt-cache reads. Foam-Agent ($0.30 total) and
MetaOpenFOAM ($0.17 total) are roughly an order of magnitude cheaper per task, trading cost for
the coverage and quality the SIGA harness buys with more context. Per-row wall-clock and cost are
in Table 3.

Interpretation. The OpenFOAM result is single-run and scored with a file-text-and-coverage
metric rather than TreeSim, so we read it as transfer evidence rather than a second full benchmark.
What it shows, now at 30 tasks and against two native agents, is that the SIGA recipe is not tied to
XML or to GEOS-specific assets: the transferable piece is the workflow logic, and the dominant,
most portable intervention is forced end-of-turn verification that prevents silent incompleteness.

E    LAMMPS transfer study
Motivation. The OpenFOAM study (App. D) showed the recipe extends to a schema-free, text-file
simulator. To probe whether it also transfers across model family and into a physically richer domain,
we ran a LAMMPS molecular-dynamics input-script authoring study with two backbone models
across 12 factor configurations. Both backbones run inside the Claude Code harness; “Claude”
denotes the Claude Sonnet 4.6 backbone model (also used as the LLM judge), not the harness, and
“DeepSeek” denotes deepseek-v4-flash. The Claude Code harness is used in every experiment
in this paper except the OpenHands cross-harness run (App. C). LAMMPS differs from GEOS and
OpenFOAM in several ways: its input is a sequential command script with strict ordering rules and
no formal schema; a large curated example library ships with the source; and the physics space is
broader (thermostats, barostats, 2D simulations, NEMD, electrostatics, mechanical deformation). We
treat the result as transfer evidence rather than a second benchmark.

LAMMPS adaptation of R/S/X/M . We ported the same four binary factors to LAMMPS input
authoring. R replaced the GEOS RAG collections with three ChromaDB collections over LAMMPS
example scripts, documentation RST files, and command syntax extracted from the LAMMPS source
tree. M replaced the GEOS XML cheatsheet with a LAMMPS-specific primer covering required
command ordering, unit conventions, and ten task-specific critical pitfalls (e.g. LJ lattice density


                                                  19
Table 8: Per-cell LAMMPS LLM-judge scores (0–10), 9 tasks, single run, two backbones. Structural
scores are near-ceiling (≥ 0.976) for all cells; † marks the two cells with structural < 1.0. Best mean
per backbone in bold.
  Backbone            Config      couette   crack_2d   lj_indent   lj_melt   lj_melt_min   lj_solid   msd_diff   nvt_water   tension   mean
  Claude Sonnet 4.6   Vanilla          7          3           3          7            9          9          6           5         8    6.33
  Claude Sonnet 4.6   M+R              6          6           2          7            9          9          9           8         6    6.89
  Claude Sonnet 4.6   M+S              6          6           2          5            9          8          8           7         6    6.33
  Claude Sonnet 4.6   M+R+S            7          1           4          6            8          7          8           7         8    6.22
  Claude Sonnet 4.6   M+S+X †          7          2           3          2            6          8          9           7         8    5.78
  Claude Sonnet 4.6   M+R+S+X          8          3           4          8            7          9          9           5         9    6.89
  DeepSeek v4-flash   Vanilla †        6          2           2          2            9          8          3           3         6    4.56
  DeepSeek v4-flash   M+R              7          5           6          9            4          8          7           8         8    6.89
  DeepSeek v4-flash   M+S              5          2           5          8            6          8          8           6         7    6.11
  DeepSeek v4-flash   M+R+S            8          4           3          8            9          9          5           8         6    6.67
  DeepSeek v4-flash   M+S+X            6          2           2          9            9          8          5           6         7    6.00
  DeepSeek v4-flash   M+R+S+X          8          3           8          9            9          9          8           7         9    7.78




semantics, region-before-create_box ordering, unfix before switching integrators, the SLLOD
Couette pattern, MSD compute syntax). S replaced the GEOS XML stop-hook with a LAMMPS
structural stop-hook that blocks turn completion if the generated script fails heuristic structural
checks. X replaced xmllint with an agent-callable LAMMPS script validator applying the same
checks as the hook. Because LAMMPS has no canonical schema for these tasks, the validator checks
command presence, correct units and atom_style, ensemble type, task-specific physics commands
(fix indent, fix deform, compute msd, fix nvt/sllod, fix npt), temperature ranges, and
minimum run lengths.

Benchmark and metric. The benchmark contains 9 tasks spanning a range of MD physics:
Lennard-Jones melt from an FCC lattice (lj_melt, lj_melt_minimal), LJ FCC solid NVT equili-
bration (lj_solid), 2D crack propagation (crack_2d), 2D nanoindentation (lj_indent), Couette
flow via SLLOD (couette_flow), mean-square-displacement diffusion (msd_diffusion), TIP3P
water NVT with long-range electrostatics (nvt_water), and uniaxial tension with lateral NPT relax-
ation (uniaxial_tension). Each task provides a detailed natural-language specification; the agent
writes the input script without executing LAMMPS. We use a two-stage metric. Stage 1 (structural)
is a deterministic regex-based check over 11–15 per-task criteria (required commands, expected
command patterns, task-specific physics markers, coarse temperature/step-count ranges); it verifies
presence and rough plausibility, not value-correctness. Stage 2 (LLM judge) gives the specification,
a ground-truth script, and the agent script to Claude Sonnet 4.6 and elicits an integer score 0–10
with rationale. LLM-judge scores are not fully deterministic at temperature 0 (per-call variance
through OpenRouter); we report a single evaluation pass and treat the scores as approximate rankings.
Mean LLM-judge score is the primary metric; structural score is a secondary reliability indicator
(near-ceiling, ≥ 0.976, for all 12 cells).

Factor-style readout.             Using the 6-cell subset per backbone and reporting single-run descriptive
main effects:
                      Claude Sonnet 4.6: R: +0.52, S: −0.30, X: −0.10, M : +0.09;
                      DeepSeek v4-flash: R: +1.55, S: +0.91, X: +0.83, M : +2.13.
On DeepSeek, M exhibits the largest descriptive main effect: the primer contributes an average
marginal gain of over two points relative to the unguided baseline, and R is second, indicating that
access to the LAMMPS example and documentation corpus matters substantially for this model. On
Claude, the baseline is already strong and all effects are small; the only reliably positive factor is R.
This contrasts with GEOS and OpenFOAM, where S was dominant.

Why the adapters help, and why structural scores are near-ceiling. Both backbones reach
near-identical structural scores (≥ 0.976) across all configurations: both reliably include all required
commands and parameter fields regardless of which adapters are active. The LLM judge, which
compares the actual values assigned to those parameters against ground truth, is where they diverge.
Failure in this domain is therefore never whole-section omission; it is the correctness of specific
values, physical constants, lattice densities, ensemble parameters, command-argument ordering. The
failure-mode analysis across all 12 agents points to two correctable classes. M (the primer) addresses
knowledge errors: LJ unit-convention mistakes (passing a lattice constant as a reduced density, real


                                                                    20
argon parameters in an LJ-unit script) and command-ordering errors (create_box before defining a
region, two integrators active because NVE was not unfixed before NVT). R (retrieval) addresses
syntax-precision errors: invalid lattice style names, incorrect fix argument ordering, undefined
compute references, all exact-token mistakes a retrieved working example corrects immediately.

Why the DeepSeek gain is larger. The 3.2-point DeepSeek gain (4.56 → 7.78) versus the 0.56-
point Claude gain (6.33 → 6.89) reflects a difference in baseline knowledge. Claude vanilla already
assigns mostly correct values; its residual errors concentrate on tasks needing precise geometric
reasoning (crack_2d notch placement), which neither M nor R fully resolves. DeepSeek vanilla
makes more of the knowledge-correctable unit/ordering/syntax errors that M and R directly target,
so the adapters narrow the baseline gap and let DeepSeek match or exceed guided Claude. Per-task,
the gains concentrate where the DeepSeek baseline is lowest (lj_melt, crack_2d, lj_indent,
msd_diffusion, nvt_water); the highest-baseline tasks (lj_solid, lj_melt_minimal) are es-
sentially unchanged or mildly hurt, since they closely match common MD examples. crack_2d
remains the hardest task across both backbones and every adapter combination: getting the notch-
coordinate logic right is a geometric-reasoning problem, not a knowledge lookup.

Interpretation. The LAMMPS result replicates the core finding, that the plugin recipe transfers,
but shifts the dominant mechanism. In GEOS and OpenFOAM, S (forced end-of-turn verification)
was the largest reliability effect because it prevented silent failure to produce required outputs. In
LAMMPS we observed little silent failure; performance differences were driven by the correctness of
assigned parameter values, so M and R carry the quality signal. The strongest transfer evidence is
the DeepSeek result: a model that scores 4.56 without guidance reaches 7.78 with the full adapter,
matching or exceeding guided Claude through informational scaffolding alone. We do not claim
this has the same evidentiary weight as the GEOS benchmark; it is single-run, scored by a non-
deterministic LLM judge, and uses a different metric. What it shows is that the SIGA recipe is not
tied to XML, to a specific schema, or to catastrophic-failure prevention: where correctness rather
than completeness is the bottleneck, the recipe adapts by shifting weight from workflow enforcement
to knowledge injection.

F    Extended discussion
This appendix collects the limitations, cross-cutting analysis, and design guidance that the main text
(§7) defers.

Limitations. The X main effect conflates the agent-callable validator with the hook also running
xmllint when S is on. Headline GEOS numbers are n = 3 runs on deepseek-v4-flash, and
the cross-model panel (minimax-m2.7, gemini-3-flash-preview) is single-run. We validated
cross-harness transfer only on OpenHands; time and cost constraints prevented us from extending to
the other coding harnesses now available (e.g. OpenCode, Pi, Hermes Agent). The transfer studies
are single-run: OpenFOAM (30 tasks) uses a file-text-and-coverage metric with native baselines
restricted to lint-only mode, and LAMMPS (9 tasks) is scored by a non-deterministic LLM judge.
TreeSim is structural, not physical: a 0.8 deck is not guaranteed to run. The held-out-eval lift is
concentrated in two tasks, and the human baseline is n = 2 on a single task with the budget-matched
comparison bounded below by the agent. In the autonomy study (§6.4), the “human supervisor” the
agent could consult was an LLM user simulator (a separate deepseek-v4-flash prompted with
the full original brief), not a real human, for time and cost reasons; this is a reasonable proxy for
measuring consultation behaviour but is not a substitute for studying live human–agent interaction.
We scope each claim to its evidence accordingly.

What transfers across simulators. The component that matters most is interface-dependent, and
the binding constraint of each interface predicts it. On GEOS and OpenFOAM, where the failure mode
is structural incompleteness, S (forced end-of-turn verification) is the dominant intervention: it gives a
roughly order-of-magnitude σ reduction and hard-tail rescue on GEOS, and on OpenFOAM it carries
the quality gain (+0.168 mean across 30 tasks) while every SIGA cell holds full required-file coverage
where two native agents leave 8–12 tasks incomplete. The LAMMPS transfer qualifies this picture:
when the agent already produces complete, structurally valid scripts (structural score ≥ 0.976 for
both backbones) and the bottleneck is the correctness of parameter values, the dominant components


                                                   21
shift to M (+2.13 on DeepSeek) and R (+1.55), and S contributes little. The practical reading is
therefore to match the component to the interface’s binding constraint: ship the completeness gate
(S) when whole-block or whole-file omission is the failure mode, and ship procedural memory plus
retrieval (M, R) when value-correctness is the failure mode.

New tools are not used just because they are exposed. An earlier version of the adapter exposed
cheatsheet content through an MCP memory_lookup tool with embedding top-k retrieval over
the distilled corpus, motivated by the retrievable-procedural-memory framing common in self-
evolving-agent literature. Across every test-set run in which the tool was available, the agent called
it zero times (the tool was verified functional). Delivering the same content through always-on
–append-system-prompt (the M factor) is what produced any lift. The general lesson is that
providing the agent with a new tool does not guarantee the agent will choose to use it: a retrieval-
based memory module depends on agent-initiated lookup, and should be benchmarked against an
always-on alternative before being treated as effective.

Adapter-design recommendations. Each is grounded in a failure category that survives the
Vanilla-to-best-config transition. (i) Schema- or coverage-enforced block presence is the cheapest
reliable adapter; the OpenFOAM transfer suggests this generalises to any end-of-turn complete-
ness check, not just XSD validation. (ii) Procedural memory should be delivered as an always-on
system-prompt augmentation rather than as a retrievable tool; an agent that has to decide to in-
voke memory may simply never do so. (iii) Memory cheatsheets enumerating “for physics X,
use solver Y ” should be paired with explicit negative constraints (“the GT contains exactly k
Constitutive children, no more”); without them they trade missing_block for extra_block
and hallucinated_extras. (iv) Attribute-level oracles (per-solver allowed-attribute tables) are
the next frontier; bad_attribute_value is untouched by everything we tested. (v) Autonomy
benchmarks should remove the easy on-disk oracles before measuring consultation behaviour. (vi)
Closed-loop retries driven by validator output are needed to raise the ceiling, since static hooks only
raise the floor.


G    TreeSim: full definition

TreeSim is computed by the scorer at src/eval/judge_geos.py (tree_sim). We summarize the
recursion that Eq. 3 abbreviates.
Parsing and merging. Each deck file is parsed to an XML tree; <Included><File
name="..."/></Included> directives are resolved recursively (relative to the including file, with
cycle detection). A directory of files is merged into one tree by attaching all top-level children under a
synthetic <Problem> root. File-level TreeSim scores a single resolved file against the corresponding
ground-truth file; deck-level TreeSim scores the merged directory against the merged ground truth.
Both call the same routine.
Node labels and attribute similarity. A node is an XML element labeled tag[name] (tag plus its
name attribute, if any). Attribute similarity a is a Jaccard-style overlap: the score counts attribute
keys present in both ground-truth and generated elements whose values are equivalent, divided by
the union of keys. Values are equivalent if (i) strings match case-insensitively, (ii) numeric scalars
agree within relative tolerance 10−6 (denominator max(|a|, |b|)), or (iii) comma-separated lists agree
element-wise.
Child matching. For a ground-truth node, its children and the generated node’s children are grouped
by tag; within each tag group, generated children are matched to ground-truth children by greedy
bipartite matching in descending order of a pairwise similarity that requires a tag match and rewards
name agreement and attribute overlap. Matching is unordered: sibling order does not affect the
headline score (a separate Kendall-τ ordering diagnostic is computed for PeriodicEvents only and
is not part of TreeSim).
Scoring recursion. A matched leaf contributes its attribute similarity a. A matched interior node
contributes α a+(1−α) s̄child with α = 0.3, where s̄child averages, over the ngt ground-truth children,
the score of each child’s matched generated counterpart (an unmatched ground-truth child contributes
0). Surplus (hallucinated) generated children apply an additive penalty β nextra /(ngt + nextra ) with


                                                   22
β = 0.1. Each node score is clamped to [0, 1]; the root node’s score is the deck (or file) TreeSim, and
the scores of the top-level children are the per-section scores reported in the section breakdowns.


H     Implementation details

H.1    Hook wiring

Historical note: prior to 2026-04-21T12:08Z, hooks.json had the wrong schema and
run_experiment.py never passed –plugin-dir, so early “hook-on” runs did not actually load the
hook. All post-fix results in this paper use a verified-wired hook.

H.2    Primer artefacts and hygiene

The memory cheatsheet is at plugin/memory_primer_m1u.md.     The hygiene au-
dit is at scripts/memory/hygiene_audit.py; the API-contamination check is at
scripts/memory/check_api_contamination.py.

H.3    Harness-less baseline

Harness-less eval: scripts/harnessless_eval.py. Inputs: one held-out ICL demonstration
(task plus ground-truth XML), one call per task, with an inline-XML protocol replacing all file-
system instructions. System prompt = run/AGENTS.md with file-system paragraphs stripped and
replaced by the inline-XML protocol. Temperature 0.2, max_tokens = 16384, 600-s per-request
timeout, 8-worker thread pool. Result on val (minimax-m2.7): TreeSim = 0.333 (16 parsed, 1
silent provider drop counted as zero). The vanilla Claude Code harness on the same model recovers
+0.488 over this floor (Table 7, 0.821 vs the 0.333 floor); any cell on deepseek-v4-flash reaches
a different absolute level (≥ 0.857). In both cases the harness contributes substantially even before
any GEOS-specific adaptation.


I     Agent autonomy companion: protocol

This appendix complements §6.4 with the protocol and intermediate diagnostics for the autonomy
companion study.

Difficulty tiers. We tag each ground-truth parameter into one of four tiers, following a domain-
expert-reviewed taxonomy: T1 software defaults (output format, restart frequency, log levels, boolean
flags), T2 standard numerics (Newton tolerance, linear solver, time-step limits, discretisation choice,
element type), T3 domain-inferable (densities, viscosities, porosities, permeabilities, Biot coefficients,
standard relperm exponents), and T4 problem-defining (geometry, well locations, applied loads,
simulation duration, prescribed history tables). Medium difficulty omits T1+T2; Hard additionally
omits T3. T4 is preserved verbatim at every level.

Spec generation. Each task’s instructions.txt is rewritten by deepseek-v4-pro
(scripts/relax_specs.py) given the original brief and the tier definitions, in two passes (Medium,
Hard). The model is required to drop only, never to invent or alter values, and to keep external-table
references (e.g., *.geos input files for boundary-history tables) at every level. Each rewrite is paired
with a JSON record listing the values dropped, the tier of each, and a hygiene check that canonicalises
numeric tokens (handling LaTeX $1.0\times10ˆ{-4}$, scientific notation, unicode superscripts)
and verifies that no canonicalised dropped value appears in the rewrite text except where the same
canonical also appears in a kept-T4 value (“shared”). Across all 16 (task × level) pairs, hygiene
flags zero leaks after the LaTeX-aware pass and 1 shared-only ambiguity (Mandel/Medium, where
the dropped solver tolerance 1e-4 canonicalises to the same value as the first entry of the kept T4
prescribed-displacement time table). The 16 rewrites are committed and frozen before any run starts.

Drop volume (8 tasks total).


                                                   23
Table 9: Volume of specification dropped at each difficulty level. T1=software defaults, T2=standard
numerics, T3=domain-inferable physical values, T4=problem-defining (kept verbatim at every level).
Char count is summed across all 8 tasks.
                      Level      Char drop    Values dropped     T1 / T2 / T3 split
                      Medium      −20.5%             89             27 / 62 / 0
                      Hard        −50.5%            184            26 / 53 / 105


 Supervisor        channel. The          interactive     cells    expose        an      MCP       server
(plugin/scripts/supervisor_mcp.py) with a single tool, consult_supervisor(question:
 str). The handler invokes deepseek-v4-flash with a system prompt that injects the full
 original instructions.txt for the current task and the rule “answer concisely using only
 information present in the specification; if the answer is not in the specification, say so plainly;
 do not invent; do not volunteer information the agent did not ask about; speak in the same
 scientific language the specification uses (no GEOS XML tag names unless the agent named
 them first)”. The full original brief is mounted at a fixed container path outside /workspace; the
 path is passed via the per-MCP-server env block in the explicit –mcp-config, not via docker
-e. Every consultation appends a structured record (question, answer, latencies, token counts)
 to /workspace/supervisor_calls.jsonl for audit. We programmatically scanned all 32
 events.jsonl streams for any Read or Bash tool input referring to the supervisor’s spec path; zero
 hits. The path is exposed only via the supervisor_stats introspection tool’s return value, which
 does not affect the consultation-rate result since no agent queried that tool for the spec path.

Prompt variants. Two are reported. V0 (the default) describes the channel in both the
consult_supervisor docstring and a system-prompt addendum as something to use “when a
value or design decision you need is missing from the brief AND you cannot reasonably infer it from
GEOS conventions, GEOS example simulations, or standard geophysics practice. Each call costs the
researcher’s time, so prefer to infer when you can.” V1 (neutral) drops the prefer-to-infer language
and treats infer-vs-ask as peer paths: “values that are missing can be inferred from GEOS conventions
and analogous examples, OR you may ask the researcher; choose whichever path is more reliable.”
V0 was selected by 1/32 trials; V1 was selected by 1/32 trials.

Diagnostic on Mandel/Hard: on-disk findability. For each T2/T3 value dropped from the Man-
del/Hard rewrite (26 values), we test whether the same canonicalised numeric token appears anywhere
in the GEOS-shipped example XMLs that the agent is allowed to read (excluding the GT files for
the current task, which are blocked by contamination): 15 of 26 are findable (e.g., 0.001 Pa s fluid
viscosity in 210 other examples; 1e-12 m2 permeability in 51; reference porosity 0.375 in 8). One
value (bulk modulus 66.667 MPa, an unusually rounded value) has zero hits; the rest are non-numeric
T2 directives (subcycling, line-search action, discretisation choice) the agent can plausibly transfer
from analogous benchmarks. We interpret this as a structural reason for the consultation rate observed
in §6.4.

Where the agent looks. Aggregate Read/Glob call counts into /geos_lib/inputFiles/ across
all 8 tasks per cell range from 142 (X+M, Medium) to 404 (Vanilla, Medium) per cell. The agent is
not idle; it is grepping the example library.

Cost and wall. 64 main runs at deepseek-v4-flash cost ∼$4.20 DeepSeek API spend at full
off-peak pricing (input + cache-read + output, summed from events.jsonl) and ran in ∼2h wall at
workers=4. 16 deepseek-v4-pro spec-rewrite calls cost ∼$0.50. The 2 supervisor consultations
cost ∼$0.001. The 32-run V1 rerun added ∼$2 and ∼55min wall.

Immediate follow-ups. (a) A second run per cell to harden the n = 1 point estimates (∼ $3,
∼2h). (b) A no-confound F0 control (supervisor MCP wired without the plugin loader) so the
F0 vs F0+supervisor comparison is not contaminated by tool-list-shape effects. (c) An aggressive
contamination block at the physics-family level (e.g., for ExampleMandel, block all *Mandel* and
*Poroelastic* input files, not just the GT basenames). The Mandel/Hard diagnostic predicts (c) is
what would actually move the consultation rate; it directly tests whether the on-disk example library
is the binding constraint.


                                                  24
J     Human baseline: protocol and browser-history breakdown

This appendix complements §6.3 with the protocol and the per-domain navigation breakdown.

Protocol. Two geoscience-domain-expert volunteers (Expert 1, Expert 2; grad-level geoscientists,
new to GEOS-the-software) attempted the buckleyLeverettProblem task (1D Buckley–Leverett
CO2 /brine displacement; vanilla Claude Code on deepseek-v4-flash reaches deck-level TreeSim
0.751 ± 0.016 on this task at n = 3 runs) under a one-hour timeslot. Participants received the same
system primer the agent receives (run/AGENTS.md including the GEOS Primer), a working directory
mirroring the agent’s container layout (empty inputs/, empty outputs/), and read access to a
filtered copy of the GEOS source tree mounted at the same path the agent sees. The blocked file
list was identical to the agent’s contamination block (the three ground-truth XMLs and the tutorial
Example.rst). Participants were asked to work primarily from the GEOS Sphinx documentation,
the GEOS GitHub repository, and grep/find on their own machine; use of LLM chatbots, code-
completion services, and general internet search was discouraged but not strictly enforced. Wall-clock
was measured from spec-opened to deck-final; participants self-reported. We additionally collected
the browser history for each participant’s session (Expert 1: a CSV export from a Chrome history
extension; Expert 2: a JSON export from a Firefox history extension) and filtered to the day of
the session. Expert 1 subsequently returned to the assignment with no time cap and produced both
required files; we report the catch-up session below.


Table 10:       Browser-navigation breakdown during the one-hour authoring session,
per participant.      “GEOS docs” = visits to the GEOS Sphinx documentation host
(geosx-geosx.readthedocs-hosted.com) including all subpages.                 “GEOS GitHub” =
visits to github.com/GEOS-DEV/GEOS. “Other” = unrelated tabs that remained open during the
session. No participant visited any LLM chatbot, Stack Overflow, or general scientific-paper site.
    Participant                      Wall (min)   Total visits   GEOS docs   GEOS GitHub   Search   Other (Slack, etc.)
    Expert 1 (1 h)                     48.2           29              20          5          3              1
    Expert 1 (extended, +catch-up)     ∼180          106              73         21          6              6
    Expert 2 (1 h)                     46.7           73              54         11          5              3


Per-domain breakdown.

Top GEOS pages visited. Across both participants, the most-visited GEOS pages were
the CompositionalMultiphaseFlow solver reference, the EventManager page (which both
participants flagged as the source of difficulty in their post-session notes), the Outputs
schema, and the GEOS Tutorials/Index landing page. Both participants browsed the
compositionalMultiphaseFlow/dbc/buckleyLeverett_1d/ sibling deck on GEOS GitHub,
a separate 1D Buckley–Leverett deck (DBC variant) that is not the ground truth and is not blocked.
In post-session notes, Expert 2 reported that Outputs and Events setup “took forever to try and
understand because it is not very clear and pretty unintuitive”; Expert 1 reported using the DBC deck
as a structural template, then adjusting mesh/run-time/solver parameters to match the spec. Within the
1h budget, neither attempted to write the second required file (buckleyLeverett_benchmark.xml);
Expert 1 produced it during the extended catch-up session.

Catch-up session: what changed. Expert 1’s catch-up session adds 77 navigations on top
of the original 29, of which 69 are GEOS-internal (Sphinx + doxygen + GitHub). The
qualitative strategy is unchanged (Sphinx-prose-driven authoring with sibling decks pulled
from GitHub for structural templates), but the docs surface broadens: heavy re-reading of
EventManager, Outputs, and TasksManager (consistent with Expert 1’s written note that
“2/3 of this time” went to the outputs/events portion of the deck); three doxygen visits to
PhaseVolumeFractionKernel.hpp (Expert 1 reports having to “look at the source code to get spe-
cific inputs for the prompt, specifically the fieldName for the .hdf5 output”); and several visits to an
unrelated compositionalMultiphaseWell/benchmarks/Egg deck used as a structural template
for outputs/events/tasks blocks. The agent’s behaviour on this same task does not change between the
two “human sessions”; it does not visit any of these pages, and it solves the outputs/events portion in
the same ≈ 7 min envelope.


                                                                 25
Agent-side counterpart. Cross-run file-access analysis of 7 vanilla-Claude-Code runs on the
same task (scripts/analysis/analyze_file_access.py) gives means of ≈ 14 unique files
per run, ≈ 11 XML reads from /geos_lib/inputFiles/, ≈ 7 Grep calls, ≈ 5 Glob calls; plugin
variants drop unique-file reads to ≈ 4 and replace Grep/Glob with ≈ 2 structured retrieval calls. The
cumulative file/document surface the humans access (Sphinx pages plus GitHub-rendered XMLs) is
roughly comparable in count to the agent’s file-read surface, but they are different files: the humans
read prose narrating the simulator’s vocabulary, the agent reads concrete XMLs that exemplify it.

Outputs. Scoring       scripts:             scripts/score_human_baseline.py,
scripts/analyze_human_browser_history.py.        Browser-history exports and
submitted XMLs at data/human_baseline/.         A narrative summary is at
docs/2026-05-04_human-baseline-browser-analysis.md.

Caveats. n = 2 on a single task in a one-hour budget is a calibration anchor, not a study of human
authoring competence. The participants are domain-expert subsurface modellers, not GEOS power
users; a longer-time budget or a participant pool of long-time GEOS users would likely change
the absolute level. The extended-budget sanity check on Expert 1 raises the deck-level number
to 0.931 at ∼ 3 h wall-clock, evidence that the 1-hour budget, not domain-expert capacity, is the
binding constraint on the deck-level shortfall. The GEOS-expert estimate (§6.3) brackets “simple
Buckley–Leverett” at <30 min for a power user starting from a known-good deck, locating the agent
(≈ 7 min) inside that bracket. We treat the (Expert 1 at 1h, Expert 2 at 1h) pair as the headline
budget-matched comparison; the (Expert 1 extended) pair as orthogonal anchors that contextualise it.
We treat the overall result as an existence-of-effect on three points: (i) the absolute TreeSim level on
buckleyLeverettProblem is roughly 0.78–0.81 at the file level under a one-hour domain-expert
budget; (ii) the file-usage strategy a human reaches for under documentation pressure is qualitatively
different from the agent’s source-tree-example strategy; (iii) both participants ran out of time on a
single deck before producing the second of the two required files within the 1h budget, while the
agent reaches a comparable file-level number on the full two-file task in roughly seven minutes.

K     Example GEOS deck
We reproduce an abridged form of the buckleyLeverettProblem ground-truth deck (the same task
used in the human-baseline study, §6.3) to make the cross-section constraints described in §3 concrete.
The deck is split across two XML files in the GEOS convention: buckleyLeverett_base.xml
declares physics, materials, and boundary conditions; buckleyLeverett_benchmark.xml
<Included>s the base file and adds the mesh, geometry, and event timeline. Comments and verbose
attribute defaults are elided for space; the original is 172 + 61 lines.

base file: physics, materials, boundary conditions.
 <?xml version="1.0" ?>
 <Problem>
   <Solvers>
     <CompositionalMultiphaseFVM
       name="compflow"
       discretization="fluidTPFA"
       temperature="300"
       initialDt="0.001"
       useMass="1"
       targetRegions="{ region }">
       <NonlinearSolverParameters newtonTol="1.0e-6" newtonMaxIter="50"
         maxTimeStepCuts="2" lineSearchMaxCuts="2"/>
       <LinearSolverParameters solverType="direct" directParallel="0"/>
     </CompositionalMultiphaseFVM>
   </Solvers>

    <NumericalMethods>
      <FiniteVolume>
        <TwoPointFluxApproximation name="fluidTPFA"/>
      </FiniteVolume>
    </NumericalMethods>



                                                  26
  <ElementRegions>
    <CellElementRegion
      name="region"
      cellBlocks="{ * }"
      materialList="{ fluid, rock, relperm }"/>
  </ElementRegions>

  <Constitutive>
    <CompressibleSolidConstantPermeability name="rock"
      solidModelName="nullSolid"
      porosityModelName="rockPorosity"
      permeabilityModelName="rockPerm"/>
    <NullModel name="nullSolid"/>
    <PressurePorosity name="rockPorosity"
      defaultReferencePorosity="0.2"
      referencePressure="1e7"
      compressibility="1.0e-15"/>
    <ConstantPermeability name="rockPerm"
      permeabilityComponents="{ 9.0e-13, 9.0e-13, 9.0e-13 }"/>
    <BrooksCoreyRelativePermeability name="relperm"
      phaseNames="{ gas, water }"
      phaseMinVolumeFraction="{ 0.0, 0.0 }"
      phaseRelPermExponent="{ 3.5, 3.5 }"
      phaseRelPermMaxValue="{ 1.0, 1.0 }"/>
    <DeadOilFluid name="fluid"
      phaseNames="{ gas, water }"
      surfaceDensities="{ 280.0, 992.0 }"
      componentMolarWeight="{ 44e-3, 18e-3 }"
      tableFiles="{ buckleyLeverett_table/pvdg.txt,
                    buckleyLeverett_table/pvtw.txt }"/>
  </Constitutive>

  <FieldSpecifications>
    <FieldSpecification name="initialPressure" initialCondition="1"
      setNames="{ all }" objectPath="ElementRegions"
      fieldName="pressure" scale="1e7"/>
    <!-- initial gas/water composition fractions, source/sink BCs omitted -->
    <SourceFlux name="sourceTerm" objectPath="ElementRegions"
      scale="-0.00007" component="0" setNames="{ source }"/>
    <FieldSpecification name="sinkTermPressure" objectPath="faceManager"
      fieldName="pressure" scale="1e7" setNames="{ sink }"/>
    <!-- additional sink temperature / composition specifications elided -->
  </FieldSpecifications>

  <Outputs>
    <VTK name="vtkOutput"/>
    <TimeHistory name="timeHistoryOutput"
      sources="{/Tasks/phaseVolumeFractionCollection}"
      filename="saturationHistory" />
    <Restart name="restartOutput"/>
  </Outputs>

  <Tasks>
    <PackCollection name="phaseVolumeFractionCollection"
      objectPath="ElementRegions/region/cellBlock"
      fieldName="phaseVolumeFraction"/>
  </Tasks>
</Problem>

benchmark file: mesh, geometry, events.
<?xml version="1.0" ?>
<Problem>
  <Included>
    <File name="./buckleyLeverett_base.xml"/>
  </Included>

  <Mesh>
    <InternalMesh name="mesh"
      elementTypes="{ C3D8 }"


                                            27
       xCoords="{ 0, 0.1 }"
       yCoords="{ 0, 0.00202683 }"
       zCoords="{ 0, 1 }"
       nx="{ 1000 }" ny="{ 1 }" nz="{ 1 }"
       cellBlockNames="{ cellBlock }"/>
   </Mesh>

   <Geometry>
     <Box name="source"
       xMin="{ 0.0, 0.0, 0.0 }"
       xMax="{ 0.0001, 1.0, 1.0 }"/>
     <Box name="sink"
       xMin="{ 0.0999, 0.0, 0.0 }"
       xMax="{ 0.1, 1.0, 1.0 }"/>
   </Geometry>

  <Events maxTime="70.1">
    <PeriodicEvent name="outputs" timeFrequency="70"
      targetExactTimestep="1" target="/Outputs/vtkOutput"/>
    <PeriodicEvent name="timeHistoryOutput" timeFrequency="10"
      targetExactTimestep="1" target="/Outputs/timeHistoryOutput"/>
    <PeriodicEvent name="timeHistoryCollection" timeFrequency="10"
      targetExactTimestep="1"
      target="/Tasks/phaseVolumeFractionCollection"/>
    <PeriodicEvent name="solverApplications" maxEventDt="0.01"
      target="/Solvers/compflow"/>
  </Events>
</Problem>

Cross-section constraints visible in this deck. The canonical ten-section GEOS schema collapses
here to a smaller set of blocks (no Functions, no separate Mesh in the base file) because Buckley–
Leverett is at the easy end of the bench; harder tasks add all ten. Even on this deck, deck authoring
requires several program-level constraints to hold simultaneously, and these are exactly the constraints
the bottleneck analysis (§6.2) flags as adapter-resistant when violated:
       • Region-name matching across sections.                The string region is declared once
         in <ElementRegions> and is re-used as a member of targetRegions on the
         <CompositionalMultiphaseFVM> solver. A typo in either copy silently drops the re-
         gion from the solver’s target set; xmllint does not catch this.
       • Solver–target coherence with Tasks and Outputs. The <PackCollection> in
         <Tasks> dereferences ElementRegions/region/cellBlock; the <TimeHistory> out-
         put references /Tasks/phaseVolumeFractionCollection; the <PeriodicEvent>
         in the benchmark file targets /Tasks/phaseVolumeFractionCollection and
         /Outputs/timeHistoryOutput. Three sections (Tasks, Outputs, Events) must agree
         on the same name space.
       • Constitutive references must point to declared blocks. materialList=" fluid,
         rock, relperm " on the <CellElementRegion> requires that each of fluid, rock,
         relperm is the name of a present <Constitutive> child; rock in turn references
         nullSolid, rockPorosity, rockPerm via its constructor parameters, which must also
         exist.
       • Geometry sets feed back into BCs. The <Box> elements in <Geometry> declare
         the named sets source and sink, which are then referenced by setNames in the
         <FieldSpecifications> and the <SourceFlux>. A misspelled set name does not throw
         a parse error; it produces a deck that runs but with a missing source term.
       • External tabulated functions. tableFiles=" buckleyLeverett_table/pvdg.txt,
         buckleyLeverett_table/pvtw.txt " on <DeadOilFluid> requires those files to exist
         on disk relative to the deck location. The test harness copies the buckleyLeverett_table/
         directory alongside the deck; without it, the deck parses but fails to construct the fluid model
         at runtime.
These constraints are what make GEOS XML behave as a small DSL rather than as a struc-
tured form: an authoring agent must keep five name spaces (regions, materials, sets, tasks, out-
puts) mutually consistent across blocks while also producing schema-valid attribute values. The


                                                  28
missing_block category our adapters reliably fix (§6.2) corresponds to whole-block omissions;
the bad_attribute_value category they do not fix corresponds to typos and hallucinations in the
cross-section name spaces above.

L    Efficiency table

Table 11: Mean tool calls and wall-clock per task (n = 3 runs). Wall is per-task seconds.
deepseek-v4-flash output tokens are not exposed by the API; input tokens are dominated by
cache-read of the system prompt.

      Cell              tools/task (val)       wall s (val)   tools/task (held-out-eval)         wall s (held-out-eval)
      Vanilla                  81.5                  359                90.5                              417
      X+M                      79.6                  337                75.0                              340
      S+X                      83.3                  348                74.7                              345
      S+X+M                    71.0                  326                82.9                              358
      SE-prose                 62.7                  326                70.9                              362
      SE                       68.9                  321                97.4                              390



M     Memory cheatsheet excerpt
The M factor delivers the file plugin/memory_primer_m1u.md via Claude Code’s
–append-system-prompt. The cheatsheet is a compact (775-token) enumerated reference: solver
families paired with concrete XML element names, common constitutive-model class names, and a
short list of anti-patterns. We reproduce a representative excerpt below; the full file is included in the
supplementary material.

         Solver Selection & Physics Routing
             Physics family         Primary solver                     Key supporting elements
             Hydrofracture          Hydrofracture                      SurfaceGenerator,
                                                                       ParallelPlatesPermeability
             Solid mechanics        SolidMechanicsLagrangianFEM        ElasticIsotropic, DruckerPrager
             Poromechanics          SinglePhasePoromechanics           requires flowSolverName, solidSolverName
             Thermal flow           SinglePhaseThermalFVM              SinglePhaseThermalConductivity,
                                                                       SolidInternalEnergy
             Multiphase flow        CompositionalMultiphaseFVM         DeadOilFluid,
                                                                       CompositionalMultiphaseWell,
                                                                       SourceFlux
             Contact / interfaces   SolidMechanicsLagrangeContact      SurfaceGenerator, EmbeddedSurface

         Common anti-patterns (do NOT use).

                • Do NOT use <FractureModel> or <HydraulicFractureSolver>; these are hallu-
                  cinated. Use Hydrofracture and SurfaceGenerator.
                • Do NOT use <ContactSolver>; use SolidMechanicsLagrangeContact.
                • Do NOT use <FluidProperties> as a wrapper; fluid models like DeadOilFluid
                  or CompressibleSinglePhaseFluid are defined directly within the constitutive
                  section.
                • Do NOT invent generic attribute names like toughness on the solver; verify
                  benchmark-specific attributes (e.g., kgdToughnessDominated) via retrieval.
         Actionable tips.

                • Coupling: when using SinglePhasePoromechanics, both a flow solver and a solid
                  solver must be defined and referenced by name.
                • Boundary conditions: confirm whether a SourceFlux requires a scalar scale or a
                  TableFunction for time-dependent injection.

The cheatsheet is intentionally a vocabulary dump, not a policy: it does not tell the agent which
physics family the current task requires, only which element names to use once that decision is made.
Section 6.2 traces the M-factor lift to reduced missing_block errors (the cheatsheet enumerates


                                                               29
the canonical sections and the families’ member elements) and the residual bad_attribute_value
errors to the cross-section name-consistency problem the cheatsheet does not address.

N    Representative trajectory
To make the agent’s working pattern concrete, we reproduce an abridged transcript from the
buckleyLeverettProblem task under the X+M cell (deepseek-v4-flash, the canonical headline
backbone), matching the deck shown in App. K. The trajectory shows (i) initial planning, (ii) on-disk
example-library reads (the X+M cell does not have RAG; analogous behaviour with retrieval calls is
described in §6.2), (iii) XML emission, (iv) the agent’s voluntary xmllint validation calls (the X
factor; this cell has no stop hook), and (v) the final TreeSim breakdown by section.

============================================================
Task     : buckleyLeverettProblem
Cell     : X+M (xmllint MCP validator + memory cheatsheet)
Backbone : deepseek-v4-flash
Final    : deck-level TreeSim 0.917 ; ~5 min wall-clock ; 47 tool calls
============================================================

[Plan]    The brief asks for a 1D immiscible CO2/brine displacement.
          Two files: buckleyLeverett_base.xml (physics, materials, BCs)
          and buckleyLeverett_benchmark.xml (mesh, geometry, events,
          <Included> -> base). Per the system primer (M factor),
          multiphase flow -> CompositionalMultiphaseFVM solver, paired
          with DeadOilFluid + BrooksCoreyRelativePermeability.

[Tool]    Glob('/geos_lib/inputFiles/compositionalMultiphaseFlow/**/*.xml')
          -> 18 hits including dbc/buckleyLeverett_1d/, deadOilEgg/,
          co2BrineThermal/.
[Tool]    Read('/geos_lib/inputFiles/compositionalMultiphaseFlow/dbc/
               buckleyLeverett_1d/buckleyLeverett_1d_base.xml') (211 lines)
          -> structurally analogous deck (DBC variant); extract solver
          block, ElementRegions skeleton, table-file pattern.
[Tool]    Read('/geos_lib/inputFiles/compositionalMultiphaseFlow/dbc/
               buckleyLeverett_1d/buckleyLeverett_1d_benchmark.xml')
          -> mesh xCoords/yCoords/zCoords pattern, Events block layout.

[Plan]    Confirmed: copy structural skeleton from sibling deck,
          re-parameterise per the spec (porosity 0.2, perm 9e-13 m^2,
          scale=-7e-5 source flux, sink at faceManager). Spec says
          deadoil pvdg/pvtw tables are externally supplied --
          keep tableFiles attribute, omit the table contents.

[Edit]    Write('/workspace/inputs/buckleyLeverett_base.xml', ...)
          -> 168 lines: <Solvers>, <NumericalMethods>, <ElementRegions>,
          <Constitutive>, <FieldSpecifications>, <Outputs>, <Tasks>.

[Tool]    mcp__xmllint__validate_geos_xml(
             file='/workspace/inputs/buckleyLeverett_base.xml')
          -> RETURN: invalid; error at FieldSpecification[@scale='1e7'],
             line 90: 'scale' must be a numeric value, but the schema
             also requires component='-1' on initialPressure for non-
             multi-component fields.
[Plan]    xmllint flagged a missing default; cheatsheet's
          "boundary conditions" entry confirms component is conventional
          on FieldSpecification. Patch.
[Edit]    Edit base.xml: add component="-1" to initialPressure.

[Tool]    mcp__xmllint__validate_geos_xml(...)     -> valid.

[Edit]    Write('/workspace/inputs/buckleyLeverett_benchmark.xml')
          -> 60 lines: <Included>, <Mesh>, <Geometry>, <Events>.
          Mesh: nx=1000 (1D), maxTime=70.1s, solverApplications
          maxEventDt=0.01.

[Tool]    mcp__xmllint__validate_geos_xml(
             file='/workspace/inputs/buckleyLeverett_benchmark.xml')



                                                 30
          -> valid.

[Done]    Agent ends turn. (S is OFF in this cell, so no stop-hook
          runs; the agent's own xmllint calls were sufficient.)

[Score]   TreeSim breakdown vs ground truth:
            Solvers           1.000
            NumericalMethods 1.000
            ElementRegions    1.000
            Constitutive      0.946 (BrooksCoreyRelativePermeability
                                      phaseRelPermExponent ordering
                                      swapped: agent had {3.5, 3.5},
                                      same value, but minor child-name
                                      mismatch on PressurePorosity
                                      compressibility 1e-15 vs the GT's
                                      1.0e-15 normalisation.)
            FieldSpecifications 0.871 (sinkTermComposition_water
                                      missing; the agent emitted the
                                      gas component but truncated the
                                      paired water component.)
            Outputs           1.000
            Tasks             1.000
            Mesh              1.000
            Geometry          1.000
            Events            0.892 (PeriodicEvent for
                                      timeHistoryCollection elided.)
          Deck-level TreeSim 0.917.

What        this     trajectory     illustrates. The     agent’s      translation     strategy   is
example-driven:         the first move is to locate a structurally analogous deck
(compositionalMultiphaseFlow/dbc/buckleyLeverett_1d/) under the same physics
family and use it as a structural template, then re-parameterise. This is the same strategy the
human-baseline analysis (§6.3) finds the human authors approximating via Sphinx browsing
under time pressure. The voluntary xmllint calls (the X factor) catch one schema violation
mid-trajectory (a missing component attribute on a FieldSpecification), which the agent fixes
before the next emission; this is the on-trajectory analogue of the missing-block-resilience the
bottleneck analysis attributes to schema-aware adapters (§6.2). The residual TreeSim loss (0.917
versus the per-task X+M mean of ∼0.92 on this task family, see Table 6 for the held-out-eval
analogue) sits inside the bad_attribute_value / partial_implementation regime: a paired
sinkTermComposition_water <FieldSpecification> is elided alongside its gas counterpart,
and one PeriodicEvent for the time-history collection is dropped from the events block. Both
are the kind of completeness errors a stop-hook (S) running coverage checks would have caught;
this cell does not have S enabled, which is consistent with the §6.5 finding that S is the dominant
transferable-reliability factor.




                                                31
